Unit 1 : Operating System services and components

1.1 Operating System: concept, functions :-
       An operating system i s a program that controls the
execution of application programs and acts as a n
interface between the user of a computer and the
computer hardware.

What are the functions of OS?
• Operating system performs three functions :
1 . Convenience: An OS makes a computer
more convenient to use.
2. Efficiency: An OS allows the computer
system resources to be used in an efficient
manner.
3. Ability to evolve : An OS should be
constructed in such a way as to permit the
effective development, testing and
introduction of new system functions
without at the same time interfering with
service.

Components of Computer System
• Computer system consists of hardware device and
software that are combined to provide a tool to user
for solving problems.
• Fig. 1.2.1 shows modern computer system.
• Modern computer consists of one or two CPU with
main memory and various 1/O devices. Common
bus is used for communication between these

devices. Each device has its own device controller.
• CPU and device controller uses memory cycle for
execution purposes. But memory cycle is only
available to one device at a time.
• Bootstrap program is loaded when user start the
computer. It initializes all the device connected to the
computer system and then loads required device
drivers.
• After this, operating system loads in the computer
system. In UNIX OS, an 'init' is the first process
which execute by OS.
• Interrupt is software and hardware. It is used to
send signal to CPU. Software interrupt is sometime
called system call.
• When interrupt is trigger, the CPU stops executing
the instruction and control is transfer to the fixed
location. Starting address is stored at fixed location
where the service routine executes.
• Interrupts do not alter the control flow of the
process executing on the processor.
Storage structure

Storage structure
• Processor access the data from main memory before
executing any instruction. Main memory is also

called Random Access Memory (RAM).
• DRAM is used in main memory. Fig. 1.2.2 shows
hierarchy of storage device.
• At the top of the hierarchy, we have storage on the
CPU registers. For accessing the CPU, it is fastest
form o f storage.
• Cache memory capacity i s less than 1 MB.


User program and data are stored in the main
memory. Main memory is volatile, so it can not
stored permanently.
Storage system is classified as temporary storage or permanent storage.
Top level storage devices are low capacity with faster CPU access and bottom level storage devices having very large capacity with slow CPU access speed.
I/O structure
Every device uses a device controller to connect it to the computer's address and data bus. Devices can be classified as a block oriented or character oriented, depending on the number of bytes transferred on an individual operation.
Storage devices are used to store data while the computer is off.
All the I/O devices are connected to each other by using common bus. CPU and main memory is also connected with this bus.
Various types of controller is used in the computer system. Small Computer System Interface (SCSI) controller can handle up to seven devices. Each device controller have its own buffer
 Device controller manage the data transfer between
peripheral device and its controller. Device driver is
handled b y device controller.

I/O operation steps
1. Device driver loads the registers within the
device controller.
2. Device controller takes action according to the
data loaded into the register.
3 . Data i s transfer from device to its local buffer
with the help of device controller.
4. After completion of data transfer, the device
controller sends an interrupt signal to device
driver about data transfer completion operation.
5 . Then control goes to operating system.
• The device driver is the operating system entity that
controls CPU-/O parallelism. The software that
communicates with device controller is called device
driver.
• A device can b e started by the device driver, and
the application program can continue operation in
parallel with the device operation. 

1.2 Different types of Operating System: Batch Operating System, Multi-programmed, Time Shared Operating System, Multiprocessor System, Distributed System, Real Time System, Mobile OS (Android OS)

Batch Operating System
• Batch system process a collection of jobs, called a
batch. Batch is a sequence o f user jobs.
• Job is a predefined sequence of commands,
programs and data that are combined into a single
unit.
• Each job in the batch is independent of other jobs in
the batch. A user can define a job control
specification by constructing a file with a sequence
o f commands.
•Jobs with similar needs were batched together to
speed up processing. Card readers and tape drives
are the input device in batch systems. Output
devices are tape drives, card punches and line
printers.
• Primary function of the batch system is to service
the jobs in a batch one after another without
requiring the operator's intervention. There is no
need for human/user interaction with the job when
it runs, since all the information required to
complete job is kept i n files.
Some computer systems only did one thing at a
time. They had a list of instructions to carry out
and these would be carried out one after the other.
This is called a serial system. The mechanics of
development and preparation of programs in such
environments are quite slow and numerous manual
operations involved in the process.
• Batch monitor is used to implement batch
Processing system. Batch monitor is also called
kernel. Kernel resides in one part of the computer
main memory.
• The memory allocator managed the main memory
space. Batch monitor controls the sequence of
events. Main memory store the batch monitor and
users program and data (jobs). Fig. 1.5.1 shows
memory layout for a batch system.

Computer operator gives a command to start the
processing of a batch, the kernel sets up the
processing of the first job, Job was selected from the
job queue and loaded into main memory. When a
job completed execution, i ts memory was released
and the output for the job was copied
• When a job is completed, it returns control to the
monitor, which immediately reads in the next job.
• Fig. 1.5.2 shows concept o f batch system.
• Scheduling is also simple in batch system. Jobs are
processed in the order o f submission ie. first come
first served fashion.
• When a job completes execution, its memory is
released and the output for the job gets copied into
a n output spool for later printing.

Spooling
• Spooling an acronym for simultaneous peripheral
operation on line. Spooling uses the disk a s a large
buffer for outputting data to printers and other
devices. It can also be used for input, but is
generally used for output.
• Its main use is to prevent two users from
alternating printing lines to the line printer on the


same page, getting their output completely mixed
together. It also helps in reducing idle time and
overlapped 1/0 and CPU.
• Batch system often provides simple forms of file
management. Access to file is serial. Batch systems
d o not require any time critical device management.
• Batch systems are inconvenient for users because
users cannot interact with their jobs to fix problems.
There may also be long turnaround times. Example
of this system is generating monthly bank
statement.
• An optimization used to minimize the discrepancy
between CPU and I/O speeds is spooling. It
overlaps of one job with computation o f other job.
• The spooler for instance could be reading the input
of one job while printing the output of different
job.
• Spooling refers to putting jobs in a buffer, a special
area in memory or on a disk where a device can
access them when it is ready.
• Spooling is useful because device access data at
different rates. The buffer provides a waiting station
where data can rest while the slower device catches
up.
• Computer can perform /O in parallel with
computation, it becomes possible to have the
computer read a deck of cards to a tape, drum or
disk and to write out to a tape printer while it was
computing. This process i s called spooling.
• The most common spooling application is print
spooling.
• Spooling batch system were the first and are the
simplest o f the multiprogramming systems.

Advantages o f spooling
1. The spooling operation uses a disk as a very
large buffer.
2. Spooling is however capable of overlapping 1/0
operation for one job with processor operations
for another job.

Advantages of batch system
1. Move much of the work of the operator to the
computer.
 2. Increased performance since it was possible for
job to start as soon a s the previous job finished.

Disadvantages of batch system
1. Turn around time can be large from user
standpoint.
2. Program debugging i s difficult.
3. There was possibility o f entering jobs i n infinite
loop.
4. A job could corrupt the monitor, thus affecting
pending jobs.
5. Due to lack of protection scheme, one batch job
can affect pending jobs.

Multiprogrammed O S
• CPU remains idle in batch system. At any time
either CPU or I/O device was idle in batch system.
To keep CPU busy, more than one program/job
must b e loaded for execution. It increases the CPU
utilizations. So multiprogramming increases the
CPU utilization.
• Resource management is the main aim of
multiprogramming operating system. File system,
command processor, /0 control system and
transient area are the essential components of a
single user operating system. Multiprogramming
operating system divides the transient area to store
the multiple programs and provides resource
management to the operating system.
• The concurrent execution of programs improves the
utilization of system resources. A program in
execution i s called a "Process", "Job" o r a "Task".
• When two or more programs are in the memory at
the same time, sharing the processor is referred to
the multiprogramming operating system.
• Fig. 1.5.3 shows
the memory layout for a
multiprogramming operating system.
• Operating system keeps number of programs into
the memory. It selects one program from the
memory and executes it. All the programs that enter
the system are kept in the job pool.
• Job pool consists of all processes residing o n disk
and waiting to allocate primary memory. Job
scheduling concept is used if there is no space for
process in the primary memory.

Memory management is also required to manag
h e memory for process. CPU scheduling is applier
for selecting process from memory.
• When computer loads more than one program in t o
the memory, CPU executes one program and I/O
system is busy with other programs.
• Multiprogramming operating system do not provide
user interaction with the program.
• Fig. 1.5.4 Shows working of multiprogramming OS.
• In multiprogramming operating system, programs
are competing for resources. A function of the
multiprogramming operating system is CPU
scheduling. memory management and I/O
management.
suppose there are four programs for execution. All
four programs are loaded into the memory. CPU
select first program for execution. Normally
programs contain instruction for CPU and I/O
operation.
• CPU bound instructions: c = a + b
• 1/O bound instructions: printf, scanf etc.
• When any I/O instruction is encounter in the
program, CPU select next program for processing.
CPU select second program for execution and /O
system select first program for performing 1/0
operation. Multiprogramming operating system
monitors the state of all active programs and system
resources.

Advantages:
1. CPU utilization is high.
2. It increases the degree of multiprogramming.
Disadvantages:
1. CPU scheduling i s required.
2. Memory management is also required.

Time Shared OS
• Time sharing is also called multitasking operating
system. It is logical extension of the
multiprogramming operating systems.
• User interaction with program is possible in time
sharing operating system. During execution of the


program, user interacts directly with the program,
supplying information to the program.
• Multi-tasking means that the computer can work
with more than one program at a time. For
example, user could b e working with information
from one database on the screen analyzing data,
while the computer is sorting information from
another database, while a excel sheet is performing
calculations on a separate worksheet.
• Many users share
the computer system
simultaneously in time sharing operating system.
Time sharing system uses multiprogramming and
CPU scheduling. Each user has at least one separate
program in memory.
• In time sharing system, each user is given a time
slice for executing his/her job in round robin
fashion. Job continues until the time slice ends.
• Fig. 1.5.shows multitasking OS.

 Concept of virtual machine is used in time sharing
system. It creates virtual machine one per user.
User interaction with system by using virtual
machine. User enters the command for virtual
machine and result will received back to user.
• Time sharing system is more complex than
multiprogramming operating system. It also takes
help of file system. File system is stored on the disk
so disk management is also required.
• Major problem with time sharing system is
protection and security of data.
• Time sharing system uses medium term scheduling
such a s round robin for the foreground. Background
process uses can use a different scheduling method.
Difference between multiprogramming and
multitasking operating system is context switching.
In multiprogramming system a context switching
occurs only when the currently executing process
stalls for some reasons. Time sharing system gives
each user the impression that the entire system is
dedicated to his use. Context switching simply
allows several applications t o be open, but only one
is working at a time.
• Truly speaking, even in true multi-tasking, only one
application program is ever running at anyone
instant.
Because
the computer automatically
switches from one program t o the next program so
quickly, all the programs seem to run
simultaneously.

Multiprocessor OS
• Multiprocessor system means more than one
processor in close communication. All the processor
share common bus, clock, memory and peripheral
devices.
• Multiprocessor system is also called parallel system
or tightly coupled systems. Multiprocessor operating
systems are just regular operating systems. They
handle system calls, do memory management,
provide a file system, and manage 1/O devices.
• Multiprocessor systems is also known as parallel
systems or multicore systems.
• Features of Multiprocessor Systems :
1. The processor should support efficient
context switching operation.
2. It supports large physical address space and
larger virtual address space.
3. If one processor fails, then other processors
should retrieve the interrupted process state
s o that execution of the process can continue.
4. The inter-process communication mechanism
should b e provided and implemented in
hardware a s it becomes efficient and easy.
Multiprocessors can be used in different ways :
1. Uniprossesors (single-instruction, single-data
or SISD)
2. Within a single system to execute multiple,
independent sequences of instructions in
multiple contexts (multiple-instruction,
multiple-data or MIMD);
3. A single sequence of instructions in multiple
contexts (single-instruction, multiple-data or
SIMD, often used in vector processing);
4. Multiple sequences o f instructions in a single
context (multiple-instruction, single-data or
MISD, used for redundancy in fail-safe
systems and sometimes applied to describe
pipelined processors or hyper threading).
Advantages and Disadvantages
of Multiprocessor Systems
• Advantages of Multiprocessor Systems :
1 . Throughput : Throughput increases because
number of processor is increases.
2. Cost: Multiprocessor system is cheaper than the
multiple single processor system.
3. Reliability: If one processor fails, it has no effect
on whole system operation.
4. Response time : Response time is less because of
increased number of processor
• Disadvantages of Multiprocessor Systems
1. Multiprocessor systems are more complex in both
hardware and software.
2. Additional CPU cycles are required to manage
the cooperation, so per-CPU efficiency goes
down.
• Multiprocessor systems are of two types: symmetric
multiprocessing and asymmetric multiprocessing.

Symmetric Multiprocessing
• The simplest multiprocessors are based on a single
bus. In symmetric multiprocessing, number
homogeneous processor are running independently
without affecting other programs.
• Systems that treat all CPUs equally are called
symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) systems.
• Each processor uses different data and program but
sharing some common resources like memory, 1/0
device etc. Fig. 1.6.1 shows
symmetric
multiprogramming system.
• In SMP, all processor are at the same level. They
work in peers. There is no master-slave relationship
i n between the processor. Each processor shares a
single copy of operating system.

Symmetric multiprocessing is easier to implement in
operating systems. Examples of symmetric
multiprocessing operating systems are Windows NT
4.0, Novell Netware 2.1 etc.

symmetric Multiprocessor
• If all CPUs are not equal, system resources may be
divided in a number of ways, including asymmetric
multiprocessing (ASMP), non-uniform memory
access (NUMA) multiprocessing, and clustered
multiprocessing.
• All CPUs are not equal. There is one master
processor and remaining is the slave processor.
Each processor has its own memory address space.
• A master processor controls the whole operations. It
gives the instruction to the slave processor or slave
processor uses some predefined set of tasks.
• Asymmetric multiprocessing has one master CPU
and the remainder CPUs are slaves. The Master
distributes takes among the slaves and I/O is
usually done by the master only.
• Each processor has own task which assign by
master processor. Asymmetric multiprocessing is
difficult to implement.

Distributed OS
• Definition: A distributed system is a collection of
autonomous hosts that are connected through a
computer network.
• A distributed system is a collection of independent
computers that appears to its users as a single
coherent system. Each host executes components
and operates a distribution middleware.
• Middleware enables the components to coordinate
their activities. Users perceive the system as a
single, integrated computing facility.
• A distributed computer system consists of multiple
software components that are on multiple
computers, but run as a single system. The
computers that are in a distributed system can be
physically close together and connected by a local
network, or they can be geographically distant and
connected by a wide area network.
A distributed system can consist of any number of
possible configurations, such as
mainframes,
personal computers, workstations, minicomputers
and so on.
• Distributed operating systems
depend
on
networking for their operation. Distributed O S runs
on and controls the resources of multiple machines.
It provides resource sharing across the boundaries
of a single computer system. It looks to users like a
single machine OS.
• Distributing OS owns the whole network and makes
it look like a virtual uni-processor or may be a
virtual multiprocessor.
• Definition : A distributed operating system is one
that looks to its users like an ordinary operating
system but runs on multiple, independent CPU.
• Distributed systems depend on networking for their
functionality. Fig. 1.7.1 shows the distributed
system.
• Examples of distributed operating system are
Amoeba, chrous, mach and v-system
• A Local Area Network (LAN) is a network that is
confined to a relatively smail area. It is generally
limited to a geographic area such as a college, lab
or building.
• WAN provides long distance transmission of data
and voice. Computers connected to a wide-area
network are often connected through public
networks, such as the telephone system. They can
also be connected through leased lines or satellites.
• A MAN typically covers an area of between 5 and
5 0 km diameter. Many MANs cover an area the size
of a city, although in some cases MANs may be as
small as a group of buildings.


 A MAN often acts a s a high speed network to allow
sharing of regional resources. MAN provides the
transfer rates from 3 4 t o 150 Mbps.

Advantages of distributed OS :
1. Resource sharing : Sharing of software resources
such a s software libraries, database and hardware
resources such
as hard disks, printers and
CDROM can also be done in a very effective way
among all the computers and the users.
2. Higher reliability: Reliability refers to the
degree of tolerance against errors and component
failures. Availability is one of the important
aspects of reliability. Availability refers to the
fraction of time for which a system is available
for use.
3. Better price performance ratio: Reduction in the
price of microprocessor and increasing
computing power gives good price-performance
ratio.
4. Shorter responses times and higher throughput.
5. Incremental growth : To extend power and
functionality of a system by simply adding
additional resources to the system

Difficulties in distributed OS are
1. There are no current commercially successful
examples.
2. Protocol overhead can dominate computation
costs.
3. Hard to build well.
4. Probably impossible to build at the scale of the
internet.

Real Time Systems
Time constraints is the key parameter is real time systems. It controls autonomous system such as robots, satellites, air traffic control and hydroelectric dams.
When user gives an input to the system, it must process within the time limit and result is sent back. Real time system fails if it does not give result within the time limits.
Real time systems are of two types: Hard real time and soft real time.
Critical task is completed within the time limit in hard real time system. All the delay in the system is fixed and time bounded. Existing general purpose operating system does not support the hard real time system functions. Real time task cannot keep waiting for longer time without allocating kernel
Soft real time system is less restrictive type. Soft
real time cannot guarantee that it will be able t o
meet deadline under all condition. Example of soft
real time system is digital telephone and digital
audio.
• Real time operating system uses priority scheduling
algorithm to meet the response requirement of a
real time application. General real time applications
with their example are listed below:
1. Transportation: Air traffic control and traffic
light system
2 . Communication : Digital telephone
3. Process control: Petroleum and paper mill
4. Detection : Burglar system and radar system
5. Flight simulation : Auto pilot shuttle mission
simulator.
• Memory management in real time system is less
demanding than i n other type o f multiprogramming
operating systems. Time critical device management
is one of the main characteristics of the real time
systems.

Mobile OS
Andriod
• Android is an open source mobile O S developed by
the Open Handset Alliance led by Google.
• Android is a software stack for mobile devices that
includes an operating system, middleware and key
applications.
• It is based o n Linux 2.6 kernel.
ndroid is an open source operating system,
created by Google specifically for use on mobile
devices (ie. cell phones and tablets)
• It can be programmed in C/C+ but most app
development is done in Java. It supports Bluetooth,
Wi-Fi and 3 G and 4 G networking.
Android Architecture
• Fig. 1.9.1 shows Android software stack. Each layer
of the stack and the corresponding elements within
each layer are tightly integrated and carefully tuned
to provide the optimal application development and
execution environment for mobile devices.
• Android provides a set of core applications :
1. Email client
2. SMS program
3. Calendar
4. Maps
5. Browser
6. Contacts

ll applications are written using the Java language.
App framework
• Used for enabling and simplifying the reuse of
components
1. Developers have full access to the same
framework APIs used by the core
applications.
2. Users are allowed to replace components.
• App Framework features are a s follows :

Libraries
• Libraries include a set of C/C++ libraries used by
components of the Android system. It is exposed t o
developers through the Android application
framework
Runtime
• Android run-time system provides core set of class
libraries to ensure smooth platform for developers.
With these libraries developers can easily import
required libraries into their applicatio
Dalvik virtual machine
• Dalvik is a purpose built virtual machine designed
specifically for android which was developed by
Dan Bornstein and his team. Strictly it was
developed for mobile devices. While developing
Dalvik Virtual Machine Dan Bornstein and his team
realize the constraints specific to mobile
environment which is not going to change in future
at least, like battery life, processing power and many
more. So they optimized the dalvik virtual machine.
Dalvik virtual machine uses register based
architecture. With this architecture dalvik virtual
machine has few advantages over java virtual
machine such a s :
1 . Dalvik uses its own 1 6 bit instruction set than
java 8 bit stack instructions, which reduce
the dalvik instruction count and raised its
interpreter speed.
2. Dalvik use less space, which means an
uncompressed dex file i s smaller in size(few
bytes) than compressed java archive file(jar
file).
• An open source software stack that includes
operating system. Linux operating system kernel
that provides low level interface with the hardware,
memory management and process control.
Middleware: A run time to execute Android
applications including virtual machine and core
libraries.
Important blocks in Android :
1. Activity manager: Manages the activity life cycle
of applications
2. Content providers: Manage the data sharing
between applications
3. Telephony manager : Manages all voice calls.
We use telephony manager if we want to access
voice calls in our application.
4. Location manager : Location management, using
GPS or cell tower
5. Resource manager: Manage the various types of
resources we use in our application
Android SDK features
The Android SDK includes
1 . The Android APls.
2. The core of the SDK.
3. Development tools.
4 . No licensing, distributions, or development fees
o r release approval processes.
5. GSM, EDGE, and 3G networks for telephony and
data transfer.
6. Full multimedia hardware control.
7 . APIs for using sensor hardware including
accelerometer and the compass.
8. APls for location based services
Application framework
1. Android offers developers the ability to build
rich and innovative applications.
2. Developers have full access to the same
framework APls used by the core applications.
3. Underlying all applications is a set of services,
including Views.
4. I t can be used to build a n application, including
lists, grids, text boxes, buttons, and even an
embeddable web browser.
Content providers enable applications to access data
from other applications (such as Contacts), or to
share their own data.
• A resource manager provides access to non-code
resources such as localized strings, graphics and
layout files.
• A notification manager enables all applications to
display custom alerts in the status bar.
• An activity manager manages the lifecycle of
applications and provides a common navigation
backstack.
Libraries used in Android
• A set of C/C++ libraries used by various
components of the Android system.
• System C library : Tuned for embedded
Linux-based devices .
• Media Libraries: Based on PacketVideo's
OpenCORE; the libraries support playback and
recording of many popular audio and video
formats, a s well a s static image files.
• Surface Manager: Manages access to the display
subsystem and seamlessly composites 2D and 3 D
graphic layers from multiple applications.
• LibWebCore : A modern web browser engine which
powers both the Android browser and an
embeddable web view.
• SGL/ 3D libraries : SL is underlying 2D graphics
engine.
• SQLite: A powerful and lightweight relational
database engine available to all applications.
Android run-time
• Android includes a set of core libraries that most o f
the functionality available in the core libraries o f the
Java programming language.
• Every Android app runs in its own process with its
own instance of the Dalvik virtual machine. The
Dalvik VM executes files in the Dalvik Executable
(dex) format.
Slow Android apps
1. By default on Android, all work is done in a
single thread, the "main application" thread. If a
component of the work takes a long time, the
rest o f the work will be "blocked". For example, a
long time to access data across the network
prevents responding t o any GUT events.
2 . In the Android OS, if a GUI doesn't respond to
an input event in five seconds, then it is
considered unresponsive and the OS will try to
kill it.
Android thread design
1. Only perform GUI actions on main application
thread. Spawn separate threads to perform
data-intensive or slow actions. Make these
threads asynchronous.
2. Main thread does not have to wait for/check on
other threads. Instead, those threads run a s they
need to and report back to the original thread.
Any changes made to the Ul should go through
the Ul thread.
Android applications
a. Android applications get distributed in a apk
file. APK stands for "Android Package". It is
simply a zip file that has a particular file
structure. An APK contains:
1. The Android Manifest file (an XML file with
lots of metadata).
2. A Resource bundle containing sounds,
graphics, etc.
3. The Dalvik classes that make up user
application.
Android Benefits
1 . An open and free development platform. Handset
makers can use it without royalty and customize
to their hearts content.
2. Component-based architecture : Lots of default
components can be replaced straightforwardly.
Proponents of Android point to the following
benefits:
a. Lots o f services : location, sql, maps, web, etc.
b. Well managed applications; isolated from each
other t o protect data and provide security;
c. Operating system can quit programs a s needed
to ensure good performance on mobile devices.
d . Portability: To support a new device, a company
has to port the virtual machine; Android apps
(Dalvik) then execute on the new device with
little to no modification.

1.3 Command line based Operating System: DOS, UNIX GUI based Operating System: WINDOWS, LINUX, MaC OS

Command Line based O S
• The command line is also called the Windows
command line, command screen, or text interface. It
is a user interface that is navigated by typing
commands at prompts, instead of using the mouse.
• Unlike a GUI operating system, a command line
only uses a keyboard to navigate by entering
commands and does not utilize a mouse for
navigating.
• Command Prompt is a command line interpreter
application available in most Windows operating
systems. It's used to execute entered commands.
• Most of those commands automate tasks via scripts
and batch files, perform advanced administrative
functions, and troubleshoot or solve certain kinds of
Windows issues.

DOS
• Disk Operating System (DOS) is created by
Microsoft : MS-DOS. MS-DOS is a disk operating
system for IBM PC-compatible computers.
• As with any other operating system, its function is
t o oversee the operation of the system by providing
support for executing programs, controlling I/O
devices, handling errors, and providing the user
• MS-DOS is a disk-based, single-user, single-task
operating system. These qualities make it one of the
easiest disk operating systems to understand.
• The main portions of MS-DOS are the IO.SYS,
MSDOS.SYS, and COMMAND.COM files.
• IO.SYS and MSDOS.SYS are special, hidden system
files
• The IO.SYS file moves the system's basic I/O
functions into memory and then implements the
MS-DOS default control programs, referred to as
device drivers, for various hardware components.
• The COMMAND.COM command interpreter accepts
commands issued through the keyboard, or other
input device, and carries them out according to the
commands definition
• When DOS runs an application, COMMAND.COM
finds the program, loads it into memory, and then
gives it control o f the system. When the program is
shut down, it passes control back to the command
interpreter.
• Directory is just like a file folder, which contain all
the logically related files. DOS files are organized
in a hierarchical or an inverted tree-like structure.
• DOS enables the user to organize the files i n a disk
into directories and sub-directories. A directory
within another directory i s called a sub-directory

UNIX
• Unix was designed to be a time sharing system.
• Unix has a simple user interface that has the power
to provide the services that user want.
• It uses a hierarchical file system that allows easy
maintainance and efficient implementation.
• Unix file system is a multilevel tree.
• Each user data file is simply a sequence of bytes.
• It provides a simple, consistent interface to
peripheral device.
• Unix supports multiple processes.
• Unix is a multiuser, multiprocess system.
• CPU scheduling in Unix is a simple priority
algorithm.
• Swapping is used if a system is suffering from
excess paging.
• Unix hides the machine architecture from the user.
• The system is written in high level language.
• Unix consists of two separable parts: The Kernel
and the systems programs.
• The Kernel interacts with the machines hardware.
• Shell interacts with the user.
• Viewing the system a s a set of layers, the operating
system i s commonly called the Kernel.
he Kernel provides the file system, CPU
scheduling, memory management through system
calls.
Architecture o f Unix O S
• There are three levels:
a. User level b. Kernel level c. Hardware level.
• The file subsystem manages files, allcoating file
space, controlling access to files and retrieving data
for users. Processes interact with the file subsystem
via a specific set of system calls.
• The file subsystem accesses file data using a
buffering mechanism that regulates flow between
the Kernel and secondary storage devices.
• The buffering mechanism interact with block I/O
device drivers to initiate data transfer to and from
the Kernel.
• Hardware control is responsible for handling
interrupts and for communicating with the machine.
Devices such as disks or terminals may interrupt
the CPU while a process i s executing.
• The Kernel may resume execution of the interrupted
process after servicing the interrupt.
• The process control subsystem is responsible for
process synchronization, IPC, memory management
and process scheduling.
• The file subsystem and the process control
subsystem interact when loading a file into memory
for execution. The process subsystems reads
executable files into memory before executing them.
The memory management module controls the allocation of memory. If at any time the system does not have enough physical memory for all processes, the Kernel moves them between main memory and secondary memory SO that all processes get a fair chance to execute.
The scheduler module allocates the CPU to processes.
The scheduler module allocates the CPU to processes. It schedules them to run in turn until they voluntarily relinquish the CPU while awaiting a resource or until the kernel preempts them when their recent run time exceeds a time quantum.
The hardware control is responsible for handling interrupts and for communicating with the machine.
Devices such as disks or terminals may interrupt
the CPU while a process is executing.
GUI based OS
• The second approach allows the user to interface
with the OS via a graphical user interface o r GUI.
• Rather than having users directly enter commands
via a command-line interface, a GUI allows
provides a mouse-based window-and-menu system
a s an interface.
• Graphical user interfaces first appeared due in part
to research taking place in the early 1970s at Xerox
PARC research facility. The first GUl appeared on
the Xerox Alto computer in 1973.
• However, graphical interfaces became more
widespread with the advent of Apple Macintosh
computers in the 1980s. Microsoft's first version of
Windows-version 1.0-was based upon a GUI
interface to the MS-DOS OS.
• Traditionally, UNIX systems have been dominated
by command-line interfaces, although there are
various GUI interfaces available.
• The choice of whether to use a command-line or
GUI interface is mostly one of personal preference.
A s a very general rule, many UNIX users prefer a
command-line interface as they often provide
powerful shell interfaces.
• Alternatively, most Windows users are pleased to
use the Windows GUI environment and almost
never use the MS-DOS shell interface.
Windows
Windows 7 is an operating system that Microsoft has produced for use on personal computers. It is the follow-up to the Windows Vista Operating System.
The 64-bit version of Windows 7 is now commonly installed on larger client systems.
Design goals are as follows:
1. Security
2. Reliability
3. Application compatibility of windows and POSIX
4. Good performance
5. Extensibility
6. Portability
7. Support.
security : Automatic analysis tools are used to test
the security of windows source code. Windows XP
receive security certificate (C-2 level Certificate)
from US government. It uses Kerberos, access
control list and packet filtering firewalls to protect
the system.
Reliability: Stable and most reliable windows
operating system from Microsoft was windows
2000. Windows uses combination of hardware and
software protection. Hardware protection for virtual
memory and software protection for operating
system resources.
Application compatibility of windows and POSIX :
IEEE 1003.1 is standard used by POSIX. Without
changing source code of windows, user cannot run
POSIX application on windows platform.
Performance : Windows XP OS provides high
performance for desktop systems. Message passing method is used for interprocess communication.
Windows support preemption of low priority
threads enables the system to respond quickly to
external events.
Extensibility : Extensibility means to support or
add new technologies. Windows XP is layered
architecture system. Kernel runs in protected mode.
An environment subsystems operates in user mode
providing different API.
Portability ： Windows XP support portability.
Source code of windows XP is in C and C++
language. Windows 7 OS can be moved from one
hardware platform to another with relatively few
changes. Platform-dependent code is isolated in a
Dynamic Link Library (DLL) called the "Hardware
Abstraction Layer" (HAL).

Windows Architecture
• Windows architecture consists of hardware
abstraction layer, kernel and executive. Fig. 1.11.1
shows windows XP architecture block diagram.
Windows XP architecture is based on microkernel
architecture. It is modular operating system.
Windows X P i s also layered operating system.
Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)
• HAL interacts directly with hardware, abstracting
hardware specifies to the rest of the system. HAL
Also interacts with the microkernel. The microkernel
and the HAL combine to make Windows XP
portable allowing it to run in many different
hardware environments.
• HAL is responsible for mapping various low level,
processor specific operations into a fixed interface
that is used by the XP kernel and executive.
• HAL provides support symmetric
multiprocessing. Device drivers map devices and
access them directly.
• The function of HAL is to present the rest of the
operating system with abstract hardware that hides
the specific details of processor versions, support
chipset and other configurations.
• HAL does not provide services for specific I/C
devices such as mouse, keyboards and disks
• Layered on the top of the microkernel are the
mode components
kernel
responsible
for
administering the operating system subsystems.
Collectively these components are known as the
executive.
• HAL also manages clocks and timers in a portable
way. After booting the system, HAL talks to the
BIOS and checks the system configuration to find
out which buses and I/O devices the system
contains and how they have been configured.
Kernel Layer
• Kernel creates basic unit of computation and
provides the foundation for multitasking support.
The kernel provides objects and threads on top of
the HAL and the hardware. Software that uses the
kernel can be defined using objects and threads as
primitives.
• Functions of kernel:
1. Thread scheduling
2. Interrupt and execution handling
3. Low level processor synchronization
4. Recovery after power failure.
To implement objects and threads, the kernel must
manage the hardware interrupts and exceptions,
perform
processor scheduling and
multiprocessor synchronization.
• The kernel's thread scheduler is responsible for
determining which thread is executing on each CPU
in the system. When switching from one thread to
another thread, the scheduler runs on the CPU and
ensures that the registers and other hardware state
have been saved.
• Thread state are ready, standby, running, waiting,
transition and terminated. The dispatcher uses a 32
level priority scheme to determine the order of
thread execution. Priorities are of two types: real
time class and variable class.
• As in multiple-level queue scheduler, as long as
there are threads in the highest priority queue, then
only those threads will be allocated the processor. If
there i s no thread in that queue, then the scheduler
will service the threads in the second highest
priority queue.
• In the second highest priority queue, threads are
not in the ready state, the scheduler will service the
third highest priority queue and s o on.
• Windows XP is not a real time system and cannot
guarantee that threads running at high priority will
receive the processor before any fixed deadline.
• Kernel is object oriented. Kernel objects are intended
to be fast. They run in supervisor mode in the
trusted context.
• Kernel object cannot be manipulated directly by
user mode programs, only through function calls.
• Kernel objects are of two types: Control object and
dispatcher object.
• Control object implement mechanism to control the
hardware and kernel resources. Control objects are
data structures that the kernel layer provides as
abstractions to the executive layer for managing the
CPU.
• Dispatcher objects are used to implement threads
along
with their scheduling and synchronization
operations.
• In windows, objects may be either named or
unnamed.
software Interrupts
• Software interrupts are of two types: Asynchronous
and deferred procedure call.
1. Asynchronous Procedure Call (APC)
• APC execute in the context of a specific thread.
APC is used to break into the execution of a
specified thread and to cause a procedure to be
called in a specified processor mode.
• The system uses APCs to complete various
functions that must b e done in a specific threads
context. Each thread maintains two APC queues :
One for kernel mode and another for user mode
APC.
• Software interrupts that are generated by kernel
mode components are the kernel mode APC. After
allocating processor, thread must process all
pending kernel mode APC.
• User mode thread can create a user APC and
request to queue this APC to another thread. A
thread executes user mode APCs when the thread
enters an alertable wait state.
• User mode APC can also be used to deliver
notification of I/O completion in user mode to the
thread that initiated the I/O.
2. Deferred Procedure Call (DPC)
• DPCs are software interrupts. They execute at
dispatch interrupt request levels (IRQL). DPC are
used to postpone interrupt processing to avoid
delaying hardware interrupts.
• DPC is also used to implements timers and
inter-process communication.
• When device driver generates a DPC, the system
places the DPC in a queue associated with a specific
processor. The driver routine can request a
processor to which the DPC should be queued. If
processor is not specified, the processor queues the
DPC to itself. The routine can also specify the DPC
priority.
Object Manager
• Object manager is the executive components.
• I n Windows XP, cach object is defined b y an object
type. Object types are created by executive
components. The object manager maintains the
windows X internal name space.
Object types in windows XP include devices, files,
threads, processes, pipes, semaphores etc. each
windows X P object is a n instance of a n object type.
• The object manager is responsible for creating and
deleting objects and maintaining information about
each object type.
Virtual Memory Manager (VMM)
• Windows XP allocates a unique 4 GB virtual
address space to each process. By default, a process
can access only the first 2 GB of its virtual address
space. The remaining 2 GB address space is used
for kernel components and this is called as system
space.
• Virtual
memory manager uses a two level
hierarchical addressing system. Windows X P divides
virtual memory into fixed size pages which it stores
either in page frames in main memory or files o n
disk.
• Virtual memory manager assigns each process one
page directory table. The page directory table
contains page directory entries.
• Each page directory entries points to a page table.
Page tables contain page table entries. Each page
table entries points to a page frame in main
memory o r a location o n disk.
• VMM uses copy on write pages and employs lazy
allocation. Windows XP allows applications to
allocate large pages. Large page is a set of
contiguous pages. Operating system consider this a s
one page. The system manages copy on write pages
using prototype page tables.
Memory Allocation
• Memory allocation i s i n three stages :
1. Reserve
2. Commit
3. Access
a. A process must first reserve space in its virtual
address space.
b. A process may not access space it has reserved
until it commits the space. Process usually commits a page only when it is read to write to the page
c. When a process is ready to use its committed
memory, it accesses the committed virtual
memory
Process Manager
• Process consists of program code, an execution
context, resources and one or more threads. Process
manger provides services for creating, deleting and
using processes and threads.
• Process and threads is the object. Windows
processes are implemented as objects. Both process
and thread objects have built in synchronization
capabilities.


1.4 Different Services of Operating System, System Calls: Concept, types of system calls

Different Services of Operating System
• Operating system provides different types of
services to different users. It provides services to
program like load of data into memory, allocating
disk for storage, files or directory for open or read
etc.
• Services will change according to the operating
system. May be the two different operating system
provides same type of services with different
names. OS makes programmer job easy by
providing different services.
• Following are the list of services provided by
operating systems:
1. Program execution
2. Input-output operation
3. Error detection
4. File and directory operation
5. Communication
6. Graphical User Interface

1. Program execution : Before executing the
program, it is loaded into the memory by
operating system. Once program loads into
memory, its start execution. Program finishes its
execution with error or without error. It is up t o
the user for next operation.
2 . Input - output operation : Program is
combination of input and output statement.
While executing the program, it requires I/O
device. OS provides the I/O devices to the
program.
3. Error detection : Error i s related to the memory,
CPU, I/O device and in the user program.
Memory is full, stack overflow, file not found,
directory not exist, printer is not ready, aattempt
o access illegal memory are the example of errors
detection.
4. File and directory operation: User wants to read
and writes the file and directory. User wants to
search the file/directory, rename file, and modify
the file etc. user also create the file or directory.
All these operation is performed by user by
using help o f operating system.
5. Communication: Communication may be
inter-process communication and any other type
of communication. Data transfer is one type of
communication. Communication is in between
two process of same machine or two process of
different machine. Pipe, shared memory, socket
and message passing are the different methods of
communication.
6. Graphical user interface : User interacts with
operating system by using user interface. All
operating
system provides user interface.
Command line interface and batch interface are
two types o f user interface used in the operating
system. In command line interface, user enters
the text command for performing operation.
Batch interface uses files. A file contains the
command various operations. When file
executes, command output is displayed on the
screen.


System Calls
• System calls provide the interface between a
running program and the operating system. Any
single CPU computer can execute only one
instruction a t a time. If a process i s running a user
program in user mode and needs a system service,
such a s reading a data from a file, it has to execute
a trap instruction to transfer control to the operating
system.
• Operating system provides services and system call
provides interface to these services. System call is
written in language C and C++ a s routines. System
calls are performed i n a series o f steps.
• System call is a technique by which a program
executing in user mode can request the kernel's
service.
An application programmer interface is a function
definition that specifies how to obtain a given
service.
•Fig. 2.2.1 shows the working of system call

hen application program calls the stub, trap
instruction is executed and CPU switches to
supervisor mode. Each system call contains its
identification number.
• OS maintains the table of system call number.
Operating system executes the system call using
that number.
•When the function completes, it switches the
processor to user mode and then returns control to
the user process.
• A system call is an explicit request to the kernel
mode via a software interrupt. When user mode
process invokes a system call, the CPU switches to
kernel mode and starts the execution of the kernel
function.
• Making a system call is like making a special kind
of procedure call. Only system call enters the kernel
and procedure call does not enter into the kernel.
• Kernel implements many different types of system
calls. The user mode process must pass a parameter
called the system call number to identify the
required system call. All system calls return an
integer value. In the kernel, positive or 0 values
denote a successful termination of the system call
and negative values denote an error condition.
 does not necessarily correspond to a
specific system calls.
1. API could offer its services directly in user
mode.
2. Single API function could make several system
calls.
3. Several API functions could make the same
system call.
• API supports a set of functions for application
programmer. It includes passing parameter to each
function and return values. API used by application
programmer are a s follows :
1. Windows system : win32 API
2. POSIX system : POSIX API
3. Virtual machine : Java API
• User function uses trap instruction for using kernel
services. Application programmer uses ordinary
procedure call. Operating system provides a library
o f user functions with name corresponding to each
actual system call. Each of these stub function
contains a trap to the operating system function.
• Trap is also called system call interface.
• Three general methods are used to pass parameters
t o the operating system.
a. Pass parameters in registers
b. Registers pass starting addresses of blocks of
parameters
c. Parameters can be placed, or pushed, onto the
stack by the program, and popped off the stack
by the Os
• Fig. 2.2.2 shows passing o f parameters as a table.

Classification of System Call
• System call i s divided into following types :
1. File management
2. Process management
3. Interprocess communication
4. I/O device management
5. Information processing and maintenance

1. File management
• File management system calls are create file, delete
file, open file, close file, read file, write file, get and set
file attribute.
• User can create a file using create() system call. File
name with attributes are required for creating and
deleting a file through system call. After creating a
file, user can performs various operations on the
file.
• Read, write, reposition are the operation performed
on the file. File is closed after finished using. Same
type of operation is performed on directory.
• Every file has file attributes. File attributes includes
name of file, type of file, accounting information etc.
To perform any operation on the file, set file
attribute and get file attribute executed to check the
attributes.
2. Process management
• System calls for process management are create,
terminate, load, execute, abort, set and get process
attributes. Other systemcall for process
management is wait for time, wait event, allocate
and free memory.
• In some situation user want to terminate the
currently running process abnormally then system
call used. Other reasons for abnormal
process
termination are error message generated, memory
dump, error trap.
• Operating system provides debugging facility to
determine the problem of dump. Dump is written
to secondary storage disk.
• Debugger is a one type of system program. It
provides facility for finding and correcting bug.
 3. Interprocess communication
• Pipe, socket, message passing and shared memory
are used for interprocess communication. Send
message, receive message, create and delete
connection, attach remote device are the system
calls used in interprocess communication.
• Shared memory: A process uses memory for
communication. One process will create a memory
portion which other processes can access. A shared
segment can be attached multiple times by the same
process. Shared memory is the fastest form of IPC
because data does not need to be copied between
processes.
• A socket is a bidirectional communication device
that can be used to communicate with another
process on the same machine or with a process
running on other machine.
• Message passing: Two processes communicate with
each other by passing messages. Message passing i s
direct and indirect communication. Indirect
communication uses mailbox for sending receiving
message from other process.
4. I/O device management
• System calls for device management are request ()
device, release () device, get and set device
attributes, read, write etc.
• Process needs several resources in its life time.
When process request for resources, request is
granted if it is free otherwise request is rejected.
Once request is granted, control is transfer to the
process.
5. Information processing and maintenance
• System calls for this category is set time and date,
get time and date, get system data, get system data,
get and set process, file and device.
• Most of the operating system provides system call
for set and get the time and date.
This type of system call is used for transferring
information from user to operating system and vice
versa.
1.5 Operating System Components: Process Management, Main Memory Management, File Management, IO Management, Secondary Storage Management

OS Components

Process Management
• Process refers to a program in execution. The
process abstraction is a fundamental operating
system mechanism for management of concurrent
program execution. The operating system responds
by creating a process.
• A process needs certain resources, such as CPU
time, memory, files and I/O devices. These resources
are either given to the process when it i s created or
allocated to it while it is running.
• When the process terminates, the operating system
will reclaim any reusable resources.
• The term process refers to an executing set of
machine instructions. Program by itself is not a
process. A program is a passive entity.
• The operating system is responsible for the
following activities of the process management.
1. Creating and destroying the user and system
processes.
2. Allocating hardware resources among the
processes.
3. Controlling the progress o f processes.
4. Providing mechanisms for process
communications.
5. Also provides mechanisms for deadlock
handling.

Main Memory Management
• The memory management modules of an operating
system are concerned with the management of the
primary (main memory) memory. Memory
management is concerned with following functions:
1. Keeping track of the status of each location of
main memory. ie. each memory location is
either free or allocated
2. Determining allocation policy for memory.
3. Allocation technique ie. the specific location
must be selected and allocation information
updated.
4. Deallocation technique and policy. After
deallocation, status information must be
updated.
• Memory management is primarily concerned with
allocation of physical memory of finite capacity to
requesting processes. The overall resource utilization
and other performance criteria of a computer
system are affected by performance of the memory
management module. Many memory management
schemes are available and the effectiveness of the
different algorithms depends on the particular
situation.

 File Management
• Logically related data items on the secondary
storage are usually organized into named collections
called files. In short, file is a logical collection of
information. Computer uses physical media for
storing the different information.
• A file may contain a report, an executable program
o r a set of commands to the operating system. A
file consists of a sequence of bits, bytes, lines or
records whose meanings are defined by their creators. For storing the files, physical
(secondary storage device) is used.
media
• Physical media are of different types. These are
magnetic disk, magnetic tape and optical disk. All
the media has its own characteristics and physical
organization. Each medium is controlled by a
device.
• The operating system is responsible for the
following in connection with file management.
1. Creating and deleting o f files.
2. Mapping files onto secondary storage.
3. Creating and deleting directories.
4. Backing up files on stable storage media.
5. Supporting primitives for manipulating files
and directories.
6. Transmission of file elements between main
and secondary storage.
• The file
management subsystem can b e
as one o r more layers of the operating
implemented system.

I/O System Management
• The module that keeps track of the status of devices
is called the I/O traffic controller. Each I/O device
has a device handler that resides in a separate
process associated with that device.
• The /O subsystem consists of
1. A memory
management component that
includes buffering, caching and spooling.
2. A general device driver interface.
3. Drivers for specific hardware devices.

Secondary Storage Management
• A storage device is a mechanism by which the
computer may store information in such a way that
this information may be retrieved at a later time.
Secondary storage device i s used for storing all the
data and programs. These programs and data access
by computer system must be kept in main memory.
Size of main memory is small to accommodate all
data and programs. It also lost the data when
power is lost. For this reason secondary storage
device is used. Therefore the proper management of
disk storage is o f central importance to a computer
system.
The operating system is
Following activities in connection with the disk
management.
1 . Free space management 2 . Storage allocation
3. Disk scheduling
• The entire speed and performance of a computer
may hinge on the speed of the disk subsystem.




Unit 2 : Process Management

2.1 process
• Process term is used in MULTICS system in the
1960. Process is an asynchronous activity.
• Process is a n active entity that requires a set of
resources, including a processor, program counter,
registers to perform its function. Multiple processes
may b e associated with one program.
• Process means a program in execution. Process
execution must progress in sequential order. It also
called task. Task is a single instance of a n
executable program. Fig. 3.1.1 shows memory layout
for a process.
 Each process has its own address space. Address
space is divided into two regions :
1 . Text region 2. Data region 3. Stack region
• Text region: It stores the code that that the
processor executes.
• Data region: It stores variables and dynamically
allocated memory that the process uses
during
execution.
• Stack region : It stores instructions and local
variables for active procedure calls.
• Process i s a dynamic entity that executes a program
on a particular set o f data using resources allocated
by the operating system.
• A process can run to completion only when
requested hardware and
software reso urces have
been allocated to the process.
• Program is a passive entity, Program becomes
process when executable file loaded into memory. A
process may be independent of other processes in
the system.
• After booting operating system, it creates
foreground processes and background processes.
• Foreground processes interact with user and
background processes is used by system.
Background processes are related e-mail, web pages,
news and printing.
• A process is used as a fundamental unit for
resource allocation in operating system. A process
normally has its own private memory area in which
it runs.
• Text region contains executable instructions. It is be
placed below the heap or stack.
• An initialized data region contains the static and
global variables that are initialized by the user.
 Un-initialized data region contains all static and
global variables that are initialized by kernel to
zero.
• Heap is used for dynamic memory allocation and
stack contains program counter.

2.1.1 Process States
• Each process has an execution state which indicates
what process is currently doing. The process
descriptor is the basic data structure used to
represent the specific state for each process.
• Fig. 3.1.2 shows a process state diagram.
• A state diagram i s composed of a set of states and
transitions between states.
• The process states are new, ready, running, waiting
and terminated.
1. New : Initially process will be in new state. OS
creates new process by using fork) system
call.
2. Ready: The process is competing for the CPU.
Process reaches to the head of the list (queue).
3. Running: The process that is currently being
executed. OS allocates all the hardware and
software resources to the process for execution.
4. Waiting: A process is waiting until some
event occurs such as the completion of an
input-output operation.
5. Terminated : A process is completes its
operations and releases it all resources.

2.1.2 Process Control Block
• Operating system keeps a n internal data structure to
describe each process it manages.
• When OS creates process, it creates this process
descriptor. In some operating system, it calls
Process Control Block (PCB).
• Fig. 3.1.3 shows process control block.
• Process control block will change according to the
operating system. PCB is also called task control
block.
he PCB is identified by an integer Process ID
(PID). When a process is running, its hardware state
is inside the CPU.
• When the OS stops running a process, it saves the
register's values in the PCB.
• Mocates a CB or it ted by operating and put
PCB o n the correct queue. Following information is
stored in process control block.
1. Process identification : Each process is
uniquely identified by the user's identification
and a pointer connecting it to its descriptor.
2. Priority number : Operating system allocates
the priority number t o each process. According
to the priority number it allocates the
resources.
3. Program counter : The PC indicates the
address of the next instruction to be executed
for this current process.
4. Memory allocation: It contains the value of
he base registers, limit registers and the page
ables depending on the memory system used
by the operating system.
5. I/O status information : It maintains
information about the open files, list of I/O
devices allocated to the process etc.
6. List of open files: Process uses number of
files for operation. Operating system keeps
track of all opened file by this process.
7. Process state: Process may be in any one of
the state: new, ready, running, and waiting,
terminate.
• When process changes the state, the operating
system must update information in the process's
process control block. Process control block maintain
other information which is not included in PCB
block diagram. This information includes CPU
scheduling, file management, input-output
management information.
• Fig. 3.1.4 shows process table with PCB.
• When process is created, hardware registers and
flags values are set by loader or linker.
• Operating system maintains pointers to each
process's PCB in a per user process table o r system
wide process table. This information is used to
access PCB quickly.

2.1.3 Process Scheduling
• CPU utilization is maximizing by using
multiprogramming concept. Processor is not idle, it
is executing a process. Processor scheduler selects
one process for execution from the ready queue.
Scheduling Queue
• Scheduling queue is queue of processes or
input-output devices. When the user process enters
into the system, they put into the job queue. Job
queue consists o f all processes of the system.
• Operating system maintains different types of
queues for different purposes. The queue are ready
queue, device queue etc. Fig. 3.2,1 shows ready
queue and device queue.
• Ready queue: The processes which are ready and
waiting to execute are kept in the ready queue.
Ready queue is stored in main memory. Linked list
i s used for representing ready queue. Pointer field
of PCB i s used for this.
Device queue : Device queue is a queue for which
multiple processes are waiting for a particular I/O
device. Each device has maintained its own device
queue.
• Process scheduling is represented by queueing
diagram. Newly created process is kept into the
ready queue and waits for processor. When CPU
select the process for executing, following things
happens:
1. Process may require I/O device to perform
operation. So it is put into the 1/O queue.
2. Process may create child process and wait for
child process termination.
3. Because of interrupt, process preempted from
CPU and put into the ready queue.

2.2.1 Schedulers
• Schedulers are used to handles process scheduling.
It is one type of system software and selects the
jobs from the system and decide which process to
run. Schedulers are of three types -
1. Long term scheduler
2. Short term scheduler 3. Medium term
scheduler
• Fig. 3.2.2 shows queueing diagram for process
scheduling. (See Fig. 3.2.2 on next page)

Long term scheduler
• Long term scheduler is also called job scheduler. It
determines which process are admitted to the
system for processing. Processes are selected from
the queue and loads into the main memory for
execution.
• Long term scheduling controls the degree of
multiprogramming in multitasking systems. It
provides a balanced mix o f jobs, such as 1/0 bound
and CPU bound.
• Long term scheduling i s used i n real time operating
system. Time sharing operating system has no long
term scheduler.

Medium term scheduler
• Medium term scheduler is part of swapping
function. Sometimes it removes the process from
memory. It also reduces the degree of
multiprogramming.
• If process makes a n I/O request and i t i s in memory
then operating system takes this process into
suspended states. Once the process becomes
suspended, it cannot make any progress towards
completion.
• In this situation, the process is removed from
memory and makes free space for other process.
• The suspended process is stored in the secondary
storage device i.e. hard disk. This process is called
swapping.

Short term scheduler
• Short term scheduler is also called CPU scheduler.
It selects the process from queue which are ready to
execute and allocate the CPU for execution.
• Short term scheduler is faster that long term
scheduler. This scheduler makes scheduling
decisions much more frequently than the long-term
or mid-term schedulers.
• A scheduling decision will at a minimum have to
be made after every time slice, and these are very
short.
• It is also known a s dispatcher.

2.2.2 Context Switch
A context switch is the switching of the CPU from
one process or thread to another. A context is the
contents of a CPU's registers and program counter
a t any point in time.
• Switching the CPU to another process requires
performing a state save of the current process and a
state restore of a different process. This task is
known as a context switch.
• A context switch can mean a register context switch,
a task context switch, a thread context switch or a
process context switch.
• A register is a small amount of very fast memory
inside of a CPU that is used to speed the execution
of computer programs by providing quick access to
commonly used values.
A program counter is a specialized register that
indicates the position of the CPU in its instruction
sequence and which holds either the address of the
instruction being executed or the address of the
next instruction to be executed, depending on the
specific system.
• Context switching can be described in more detail
a s the Kernel performing the following activities
with regard to processes (including threads) on the
CPU :
1. Suspending the progression of one process and
storing the CPU's state (i.e., the context) for
that process somewhere in memory.
2. Retrieving the context o f the next process from
memory and restoring it in the CPU's registers
and
3. Returning to the location indicated by the
program counter in order to resume
the
process.
• Context switches can occur only in Kernel mode
(system mode). Kernel mode is a privileged mode
of the CPU in which only the Kernel runs and
which provides access to all memory locations and
all other system resources.
• Other programs, including applications, initially
operate in user mode, but they can run portions of
the Kernel code via system calls. Software context
switching can be used on all CPUs and can be used
to save and reload only the state that needs to be
changed.
• To use the hardware context switch you need to tell
the CPU where to save the existing CPU state and
where to load the new CPU state from. The CPU
state is always stored in a special data structure
called a TSS (Task State Segment).
• Context switch times are highly dependent on
hardware support. Context switching represents a
substantial cost to the system in terms of CPU time
and it can be the most costly operation on an
operating system.
• There are three situations where a context switch
needs to occur. They are multitasking, interrupt
handling, user and Kernel mode switching.

2.3 Inter-Process Communication
Exchange of data between two or more separate,
independent processes/threads is possible using IPC.
Operating systems provide facilities/resources for
Inter-Process Communications (IPC), such a s
message queues, semaphores, and shared memory.
• A complex programming environment often uses
multiple cooperating processes to perform related
operations. These processes must communicate with
each other and share resources and information. The
Kernel must provide mechanisms that make this
possible. These mechanisms are collectively referred
t o a s interprocess communication.
• Distributed computing systems make use of these
facilities/resources to provide Application
Programming Interface (API) which allows IPC to
be programmed at a higher level of abstraction.
(e.g., send and receive).
• Five types of inter-process communication are as
follows:
1. Shared memory permits processes to
communicate by simply reading and writing to
a specified memory location.
2. Mapped memory is similar to shared memory,
except that it i s associated with a file in the file
system.
3 . Pipes permit sequential communication from
one process to a related process.
4 . FIFOs are similar to pipes, except that
unrelated processes can communicate because
the pipe i s given a name in the file system.
5. Sockets support communication between
unrelated processes even on different
computers.
. Data transfer : One process may wish to send
data to another process.
2. Sharing data : Multiple processes may wish to
operate on shared data, such that if a process
modifies the data, that change will be
immediately visible to other processes sharing
it.
. Event modification: A process may wish to
notify another process or set of processes that
some event has occurred.
4. Resource sharing: The Kernel provides default
semantics for resource allocation; they are not
suitable for all application.
5. Process control: A process such a s a debugger
may wish to assume complete control over the
execution of another process.
• IPC has two forms: IPC on same host and IPC o n
different hosts
PC is used for 2 functions :
1. Synchronization : Used to coordinate access to
resources among processes and also to coordinate
the execution of these processes. They are record
locking, semaphores, mutexes and condition
variables.
2. Message passing: Used when processes wish to
exchange information. Message passing takes
several forms such as : Pipes, FIFOs, message
queues and shared memory.

2.3.1 Shared Memory
A region of memory that is shared by co-operating
processes is established. Processes can then
exchange information by reading and writing data
t o the shared region.
• Shared memory allows maximum speed and
convenience of communication, as it can be done at
memory speeds when within a computer. Shared
memory is faster than message passing. as
message-passing systems are typically implemented
using system calls and thus require the more
time-consuming task of Kernel intervention.
• In contrast, in shared-memory systems, system calls
are required only to establish shared-memory
regions. Once shared memory is established, all
accesses are treated as routine memory accesses,
and no assistance from the Kernel is required.
• Fig. 3.3.2 shows client/server with shared memory.

Advantages
1. Good for sharing large amount of data. 2. Very
fast.

Limitations
1. No synchronization provided - applications must
create their own.
2. Alternative to shared memory is mmap system
call, which

2.3.2 Message Passing System
Message passing system requires the
synchronization and communication between the
two processes. Message passing used as a method
of communication in microkernels. Message passing
systems come in many forms. Messages sent by a
process can be either fixed or variable size. The
actual function of message passing is normally
provided in the form of a pair of primitives.
a) Send (destination_name, message)
b) Receive (source_name, message
 Send primitive is used for sending a message to
destination. Process sends information in the form
of a message to another process designated by a
destination. A process receives information by
executing the receive primitive, which indicates the
source o f the sending process and the message.
• Design characteristics of message system for IPC.
1. Synchronization between the process
2. Addressing
3. Format of the message
4. Queueing discipline.
ssues in IPC by Message Passing
• Message is a block of information.
• A message is a meaningful formatted block of
information sent by the sender process to the
receiver process.
• The message block consists of a fixed length header
followed by a variable size collection of typed data
objects.
• The header block of a message may have the
following elements:
1. Address: A set of characters that uniquely
identify both the sender and receiver.
2. Sequence number: It is the message identifier
to identify duplicate and lost messages in case
o f system failures.
3. Structural information: It has two parts. The
type part that specifies whether the data to be
sent to the receiver is included within the
message or the message only contains a pointer
to the data. The second part specifies length of
the variable-size message.
• Fig. 3.3.3 shows the typical message format.
Some important issues to be considered for the
design of an IPC protocol based message passing
system:
i. The sender's identity
ii. The receiver's identity
ili. Number of receivers
iv. Guaranteed acceptance of sent messages b y the
receiver
v. Acknowledgment by the sender
vi. Handling system crashes or link failures
vii. Handling o f buffers
vili. Order o f delivery o f messages

2.3.3 Features of Message Passing
1. Simplicity: Message passing system should be
simple and easy to use. It should be possible to
communicate with old and new applications.
2. Uniform semantics Message passing is used
for two types of IPC.
a. Local communication : Communicating
processes are o n the same node.
b. Remote communication : Communicating
processes are on the different nodes.
3. Efficiency: IPC become s o expansive if message
passing system is not effective. Users try
avoiding to IPC for their applications. Message
passing system will become more efficient if we
try to avoid more message exchanges during
communication process. For examples :
a. Avoiding the costs of establishing and
terminating connection.
b. Minimizing the costs of maintaining the
connections.
c. Piggybacking of acknowledgement.
4. Reliability : Distributed systems are prone to
different catastrophic events such as node crashes
or physical link failures. Loss of message because
of communication link fails. To handle the loss
messages, we required acknowledgement and
retransmission policy. Duplicate message is one
o f the major problems. This happens because of
timeouts or events of failures.
5. Correctness: Correctness is a feature related to
IPC protocols for group communication. Issues
related t o correctness are as follows:
i. Atomicity: Every message sent to a group of
receivers will be delivered to either all of
them or none of them.
ii. Ordered delivery : Messages arrive to all
receivers in an order acceptable to the
application.
iii. Survivability: Messages will b e correctly
delivered despite partial failures of processes,
machines, or communication links.
6. Security: Message passing system must provide
a secure end to end communication.
7. Portability : Message passing system should
itself be portable.

2.4 Threads
Thread is a dispatchable unit of work. It consists of
thread ID, program counter, stack and register set.
Thread is also called a Light Weight Process (LWP).
Because they take fewer resources then a process. A
thread is easy to create and destroy.
• It shares many attributes of a process. Threads are
scheduled o n a processor. Each thread can execute a
set of instructions independent of other threads and
processes. Fig. 3.4.1 shows a thread.
Every program has at least one thread. Programs
without multithreading executes sequentially. That
is, after
executing
one instruction the next
instruction i n sequence is executed.
• Thread is a basic processing unit to which an
operating system allocates processor time and more
than one thread can be executing code inside a
process.
• When user double click on an icon by using mouse,
the operating system creates a process and that
process has one thread that runs the icon's code.
• Each thread belongs to exactly one process and no
thread can exist outside a process. Each thread
represents a separate flow of control.
• Normally, an operating system will have a separate
thread for each different activity. The OS will have
a separate thread for each process and that thread
will perform O S activities on behalf of the process.
In this condition, each user process is backed by a
kernel thread. When process issues a system call to
read a file, the process's thread will take over, find
out which disk
accesses to generate, and issue the
low level instructions required to start the transfer.
It then suspends until the disk finishes reading in
the data.
• When process starts up a remote TCP connection,
its thread handles the low-level details of sending
out network packets.
• In Remote Procedure Call (RPC), servers are
multithreaded. Server receives the messages using a
separate thread.
• Different operating system uses threads in different
ways.
1. Free memory is managed by kernel thread in
LINUX OS.
2. Solaries uses a kernel thread for interrupt
handling.  

2.4.1 Thread Benefits
1. Context switching time is minimized.
2. Thread support for efficient communication.
3. Resource sharing is possible using threads.
4. A thread provides concurrency within a process.
5. It is more economical to create and context
switch threads.

2.4.3 Thread Lifecycle
Fig. 3.4.2 shows a thread lifecycle. A thread has one
of the following states.
1. New : Thread is just created.
2. Ready Thread's start) method invoked and
now it is executing. O S put thread into Ready
queue.
3. Running: Highest priority ready thread enters
the running state. Thread is assigned a
processor and now is running.
4. Blocked: This is the state when a thread is
waiting for a lock to access an object.
5. Waiting: Here thread is waiting indefinitely
for another thread to perform a n action.
6. Sleeping: Thread sleep for a specified time of
period. When sleeping time expires, it enters to
ready state. CPU is not used by sleeping
thread.
7. Dead: When thread completes task or
operation.


2.4.4 User Level Thread
User level thread uses
user space for thread
scheduling. These threads are transparent to the
operating system. User level threads are created by
runtime libraries that cannot execute privileged
instructions.
• User-level threads have low overhead but it can
achieve high performance in computation.
User-level threads are managed entirely by the
run-time system.
• User-level threads are small and faster. A thread is
simply represented by a PC, registers, stack
small thread control block. Fig. 3.4.3 shows user
he code for creation and destroying thread,
message passing and data transfer, thread
scheduling is included into thread library. Kernel is
unaware of user level thread.
User level threads do not invoke the Kernel for
scheduling decision.
• User level thread are also called many to one
mapping thread because the operating system maps
all threads in a multithreaded process to a single
execution context. The operating system considers
as each multithreaded
processes as a single
execution unit.
• Example: POSIX Pthreads and Mach C-threads.
Advantages :
1. Kernel mode privilege does not require for
thread switching
2. These threads are fast t o create and manage.
3. User level thread works even if the OS does not
support threads.
4. User level threads are more portable.
5. Threading library controls flow o f thread.
Disadvantages:
1. If thread blocks, the Kernel may block the all
threads.
2. Not suitable for multiprocessor system.
3. User level threads also do not support system
wide scheduling priority.

2.4.5  Kernel Level Thread
• In Kernel level thread, thread management is done
by Kernel. Operating systems support the Kernel
level thread.
• Since Kernel managing threads, Kernel can schedule
another thread if a given thread blocks rather than
blocking the entire processes. Fig. 3.4.4 shows
Kernel level thread.
Kernel level thread
support one to one thread
mapping. This mapping requires each user thread
with kernel thread. Operating system performs this
mapping-
• Threads are constructed and controlled by system
calls. The system knows the state of each thread.
• Thread management code is not included in the
application code. It i s only API to the Kernel thread.
Windows operating system uses this facility.
• Any application can be programmed to be
multithreaded. All of the threads within
application are supported within a single process.
• Kernel performs scheduling on a thread basis. The
Kernel support for scheduling and management,
thread creation only in Kernel space.
• Kernel level threads are slower than user level
threads.
• Example: Windows 95/98/NT, Sun Solaris and
Digital UNIX
Advantages:
1. Each thread can be treated separately.
2. A thread blocking in the Kernel does not block
all other threads in the same process.
3. Kernel routines itself a s multithreaded.
Disadvantages:
1. If thread blocks, the Kernel may block the all
threads.
2. Not suitable for multiprocessor system.
3. User level threads also do not support system
wide scheduling priority.
3.4.5 Kernel Level Thread
• In Kernel level thread, thread management is done
by Kernel. Operating systems support the Kernel
level thread.
• Since Kernel managing threads, Kernel can schedule
another thread if a given thread blocks rather than
blocking the entire processes. Fig. 3.4.4 shows
Kernel level thread.
User
space
• User threads
Kernel
space
Processor
Disadvantages :
1. Slower than the user level thread.
2. There will be overhead and increased in Kernel
complexity.

2.4.7 Operating system uses user level thread and kernel
level thread. User level threads are managed
without kernel support. Operating system support
and manage the kernel level threads.
• Modern operating system support kernel level
threads. Kernel performs multiple simultaneous
tasks in operating system. In most of the
application, user threads are mapped with kernel
level threads.
• Different methods of mapping is used in operating
system are as follows :
1. One to one
2. Many to one
3 . Many to many
1 . One to one
• In this model, one user level thread maps with one
kernel level thread. If there are three user threads
then system creates three separate kernel thread.
This model provides more concurrency because of
separate thread. Fig. 3.4.5 shows one to one
mapping.
• In this method, the operating system allocates data
structure that represents kernel threads. Here
multiple threads are run in parallel on
multiprocessor system.
• Number of threads in the system increases, the
amount of memory required i s also increases.
• Windows 95/XP and Linux operating system uses
this one to one thread mapping.
Only overhead in this method is creation of kernel
level thread for user level thread. Because of this
overhead, system performance is slowdown.
2. Many to one
• Many to one mapping means many user thread
maps with one kernel thread. Fig. 3.4.6 shows many
t o one mapping.
Operating system blocks the entire multi-threaded
process when a single thread blocks because the
entire multi-threaded process is a single thread of
control. So when operating system receive any a
blocking 1/O request, it blocks the entire process.
• Thread library handle thread management in user
space. The many-to-one model does not allow
individual processes to be split across multiple
CPUS.
• This type of relationship provides an effective
context-switching environment, easily
implementable even on simple kernels with no
thread support.
• Green threads for Solaris and GNU portable threads
implement the many-to-one model in the past, but
few systems continue to do so today.
• Advantage: System performance is improved by
customizing the thread library scheduling algorithm.
3. Many to many
• In the many to many mapping, many user-level
threads maps with equal number of kernel threads.
Fig. 3.4.7 shows many to many thread mapping.
• Many to many mapping is also called M-to-N
thread mapping. Thread pooling is used to
implement this method.
sers can create required number of thread and
there i s no limitation for user. Again here blocking
Kernel system calls do not block the entire process.
• This model support for splitting processes across
multiple processors.
• Limitations: Operating system design becomes
complicated.

2.5 Execute Process Commands

2.5.1 ps Command
• The ps command is used to provide information
about the currently running processes, including
their process identification numbers (PIDs).
• This command stands for Process Status:
• A process, also referred to as a task, is a n executing
instance of a program. Every process is assigned a
unique PID b y the system.
• The basic syntax of ps command :
ps [options]
• When ps is used without any options, it sends to
standard output, which is the display monitor by
default, four items of information for at least two
processes currently on the system: the shell and ps
• You can also check the process status of a single
process, use the syntax: p s PID

2.5.2 wait
• The kernel keeps a small amount of information for
every terminating process, s o that the information i s
vailable when the parent of the terminating
process calls wait or waitpid.
• When a process terminates, either normally or
abnormally, the kernel notifies the parent by
sending the SIGCHLD signal t o the parent.
• Because the termination of a child is an
asynchronous event it can happen at any time while
the parent is running this signal is the
asynchronous notification from the kernel to the
parent.
• The parent can choose t o ignore this signal o r it can
provide a function that is called when the signal
occurs: a signal handler. The default action for this
signal is to be ignored. For now, we need to be
aware that a process that calls wait or waitpid can :
1. Block, if all o f its children are still running.
2. Return immediately with the termination status
of a child, if a child has terminated and i s
waiting for its termination status to be fetched
3. Return immediately with an error, if it doesn't
have any child processes.
• If the process is calling wait because it received the
SIGCHLD signal, we expect wait to return
immediately, But if we call it at any random point
in time, it can block.
#include <sys/wait.h>
pid_t waitint "statloc);
pid_t waitpid(pid_t pid, int "statioc, int options);
• A process can synchronize its execution with the
termination of a child process by executing the wait
system call.
• The syntax for the system call is
pid = wait (state_addr);
where pid i s the process ID of the zombie child and
stat addr is the address in user space of an integer
that will contain the exit status code of the child.

2.5.3 leep
• When a process must temporarily suspend its
execution, it does so of its own free will. An
interrupt handler cannot go to sleep because if it
could, the interrupted process would be put to sleep
by default.
• Processes go to sleep because they are awaiting the
occurrence of some event, such as waiting for /O
completion from a peripheral device, waiting for a
process to exit, waiting for system resources to
become available and so on.
• Processes are said to sleep on an event, meaning
that they are in the sleep state until the event
occurs, at which time they wakeup and enter the
state "ready to run".
• When a process wakeup, it follows the state
transition from the "sleep" state to the "ready to
run" state, where it is eligible for later scheduling, it
does not execute immediately.
• Sleeping processes do not consume CPU resources.
• Process executing in Kernel mode must sometimes
lock a data structure in case it goes to sleep at a
later stage. The Kernel implements locks in the
following manner;
while (condition is true)
Sleep (event: the condition becomes false) :
Set condition true;
• It unlocks the lock and awakness all processes a
sleep on the lock in the following manner:
Set condition false;
Wakeup (event: the condition is false

2.5.4 exit
• Processes o n a UNIX system terminate by executing
the exit system call. The syntax for the call is
exit (status);
where the value of status is returned to the parent
process for its examination.
• The exit ( ) functions terminate the calling process.
• The command causes the shell or program to
terminate. If performed within an interactive
command shell, the user is logged out of their
current session
terminal connection is disconnected.
• Typically an optional exit code can be specified,
which is typically a simple integer value that is then
returned to the parent process.
• exit 0 command closes all of a process's file
descriptors, de-allocates its code, data and stack and
then terminates the process.

2.5.5 ill
• The kill function sends a signal to a process or a
group of processes. The raise function allows a
process to send a signal to itself.
The function prototype for kill and raise API :
#include <signal.h>
int kill(pid_t pid, int signo);
int raise(int signo);
Both return: 0 if OK, 1 on error
• There are four different conditions for the pid
argument t o kill.
1. pid > 0: The signal is sent to the process
whose process ID is pid.
2. pid = = 0: The signal is sent to all processes
whose process group ID equals the process
group ID of the sender and for which the
sender has permission t o send the signal.
3 . pid < 0: The signal is sent to all processes
whose process group IDequals the absolute
value of pid and for which the sender has
permission to send the signal.
4 . pid = = 1: The signal is sent to all processes
on the system for which the sender has
permission to send the signal. As before, the
set of processes excludes certain system
processes.



Unit 3: CPU Scheduling

3.1 Scheduling Types
 In a multiprogramming environment, usually more
programs to be executed than could possibly b e run
time at one time. In CPU scheduling it switches
from one process to another process. CU resource
management is commonly known as scheduling.
• Objective of the multiprogramming is to increases
the CPU utilization. CPU scheduling i s one kind o f
fundamental operating system functions.
• User program contains combination of CPU burst
cycle and I/O burst cycles. Process starts with CPU
burst cycle then I/O burst cycle again CPU burst
cycle again I/O burst cycle. In this way the process
completes its executions. Process will terminates
after final CPU burst cycle completions.
Program execution sequence: CPU burst cycle →
I/O burst cycle → CPU burst cycle → I/O burst cycle
→ CPU burst cycle → Program terminates.
• A CPU bound process tends to use the processor
time that the system allocates for it. An I/O bound
n the sam a
process tends to use the processor only briefly
before generating an I/O request. The CPU bound
processes spend most of their time using the
processor.
CPU Scheduler
• CPU scheduler is also called as short scheduler.
System programmers use
parameters like
program
size, resources required for program and any other
special devices are needed to determine scheduling
policies.
• Scheduling mechanism is the part of the process
manager that handles the removal of the running
process from the CP and the selection of another
process o n the basis of a particular strategy.
• Scheduler is responsible for multiplexing processes
on the CPU.

3.1.1 Preemptive and Non-preemptive
Scheduling
• The scheduling policy determines when it is time
for process to be removed from the CPU and which
ready process should be allocated the CPU next.
The scheduling mechanism is composed of several
different parts, depending on exactly how it is
implemented in any particular operating system.
• CPU scheduling is divided into two types :
Preemptive scheduling and non-preemptive
scheduling-
• Preemptive scheduling: A scheduling method that
interrupts the processing of a process and transfers
the CPU to another process is called a preemptive
CPU scheduling. The process switches from running
state to the ready state and waiting state to the
ready state.
• Non-preemptive scheduling : Non-preemptive
operation usually proceeds towards completion
uninterrupted. Once the system has assigned a
processor to a process, the system cannot remove
that processor from the process. The process
switches from running state to the waiting state and
termination o f process.
• Preemptive scheduling increases the cost and it has
higher overheads. This scheduling method is useful
only in the high priority processes require rapid
response.
• Non-preemptive scheduling is simple t o implement.
It requires some hardware platform. This method i s
attractive because of its simplicity. Windows 3.1 and
Apple Macintosh operating system uses this
scheduling method.

3.1.3 CPU Scheduling Criteria
Board Questions
• Depending on the system, CPU scheduling criteria will change
1. Throughput: CPU scheduling should attempt to
service the maximum number of processes per unit time. The higher is the number, the more work is done by the system.
2. Waiting time: The average period of time a
process spends waiting. Process is normally in the ready queue in waiting time.
3. Turnaround time: Turnaround time start from
process submission to completion of process. Turnaround time = Burst time + Waiting time
4. Response time: It is the time from the
submission of a request until the first response is produced.
5. CPU utilization: It is average function of time during which the processor is busy.
6. Fairness: Avoid the process from the starvation. All the processes must be given equal opportunity to execute.
7. Priority : If the operating system assigns
priorities to processes, the scheduling mechanism
should favor the higher priority processes.
it
8. Predictability: A given process always should
run in about the same amount of time under
similar system loads.
• Depending upon the nature of operations the
scheduling policy may differ. The CPU utilization
and throughput are the system centered parameters.
Fairness i s affect by user and system.

3.1.4 Dispatcher
• Using dispatcher, CPU selects the process from the
short term scheduler. Functions o f the dispatcher is
a s follows:
1 . Switching context 2 . Switching to user mode
3. Jump to proper location in the user program
for restarting that program.
• Dispatcher is a small program that switches the
processor from one process to another.
• Dispatch Latency : It is time taken by dispatcher to
stop running one process and start other process
running is called a s dispatch latency.

3.2 Types of Scheduling Algorithms
• CPU scheduling algorithms are a s follows :
1. First I n First Out (FIFO) scheduling
2. Shortest job first scheduling
3 . Priority scheduling
4 . Round robin scheduling


3.2.1 irst Come First Serve Scheduling
• This method of scheduling means that the first
process to request the processor gets it until it
finished execution. With this algorithm, processes
are assigned the CPU in the order they request it.
• Normally there is a single queue of ready processes.
When the first process enters the system from the
outside, it is started immediately and allowed to
run a s long a s it wants it. At the same time, other
process enters into the system; they are put onto the
end of the queue.
• New process enters the tail of the queue and the
schedule selects the process from the head of the
• When new process enters into the system, its
process control block is linked to the end of the
ready queue and it i s removed from the front of the
queue.
• When a process waits or blocks, it is removed from
the queue and it queues up again in FCFS queue
when it gets ready.
• FCFS is non-preemptive CPU scheduling algorithm.
It is also called First In First Out method (FIFO).
• FCFS is simple to implement because it uses a FIFO
queue. This algorithm is fine for most of the batch
operating systems.
• FCFS is not useful in scheduling interactive
processes because it cannot guarantee short
response time. This algorithm performs much
better for long processes than short ones.
• Turnaround time is unpredictable with the FCFS
algorithm. Average waiting time of the FCFS is
often quite long.
• Real life analogy is buying tickets.
Convey effect
• To reduce I/O device utilization, all I/O bound
processes will be waiting excessively long for
processor bound ones. This is called as convey
effect.
• If one process monopolizes the system, the extent of
its overall effect on system performance depends on
the scheduling policy and whether the process is
processor bound or I/O bound.
Advantages
1. Simple to implement
2. Fair
Disadvantages
1. Waiting time depends o n arrival order
2. Convoy effect: short process stuck waiting for
long process
3. Also called head o f the line blocking

3.2.2 Shortest Job First Scheduling
• Shortest job first scheduling algorithm is also
known as Shortest Job Next (SJN) scheduling
algorithm. It handles the process based on length of
their CPU cycle time. It reduces average waiting
time over FIFO algorithm.
• SJF is a non-preemptive CPU scheduling algorithm.
• It does not work in interactive system because users
do not estimate in advance the CPU time required
t o run their processes.
• SJF scheduling algorithm is used frequently in long
term scheduling.
• When a process request a CPU, it must inform the
system for how long it wants to use the CPU.
• When CPU become available, the system allocates
into processes with the least expected execution
time.
• To break ties, it follows the FCFS algorithm.
• Preemptive version of SJF is called as Shortest
Remaining Time Next (SRTN)
Preemptive SJF algorithm will preempt the currently
exceutig process, whereas a non preemptive SJF
algorithm will allow the currently running process
to finish its CPU burst.
• SIF selects
processes for
service in a manner
ensuring the next one will complete and leave the
system a s soon a s possible.
• The SJF scheduling algorithm is optimal only when
all of the processes are available at the same time
and the CPU estimates are available.
• SJF scheduling algorithm may be preemptive or
non-preemptive.

3.2.3 Priority Scheduling
• Priority CPU scheduling algorithm is preemptive
and non-preemptive algorithm. It is one o f the most
common scheduling algorithm in batch system.
Priority can be assigned by a system admin using
characteristics of the process.
• In this scheduling algorithm, CPU select higher
priority process first. If the priority of two process
is same then FCFS scheduling algorithm is applied
for solving the problem.
• The priority of a process determines how quickly its
request for a CPU will be granted if other processes
make competing requests.
• Each process is assigned a priority number for the
purpose of CPU scheduling.
• The priority number is normally a non negative
integer number.
• Non preemptive priority scheduling algorithm will
simply put the new process at the head of the ready
queue.
• Preemptive priority scheduling algorithm will
preempt the CPU if the priority of the newly
arrived process is higher than the priority of the
currently running process.
Problem with Priority Scheduling
• Waiting time is more for lower priority process
even if there required CPU burst time is less.
Priority scheduling algorithm faces the starvation
problem. Starvation problem can be solved by using
aging techniques.
• In aging, the priority of the process will increase
which i s waiting for long time in the ready queue.

3.2.4 Round Robin Scheduling
• Round robin is a preemptive scheduling algorithm.
It is used in interactive system.
• Here process are given a limited amount of time of
processor time called a time slice o r time quantum.
If a process does not complete before its quantum
expires, the system preempts it and gives the
processor to the next waiting process. The system
then places the preempted process at the back of
the ready queue.
• Processes are placed in the ready queue using a
FIFO scheme. With the R R algorithm, the principle
design issue is the length of the time quantum to be
used. For short time slice, processes will move
through the system relatively quickly. It increases
the processing overheads.

3.2.7 Shortest Remaining Time Next
• Preemptive SJF is called shortest remaining time first. In this algorithm, the scheduler selects the process
with the smallest estimated run time to completion.
• This scheduler gives minimum wait times in theory but in certain situation due to preemption
overhead, shortest process first might performance better.
• An advantageous of this method is that, the short processes are handled very quickly. The system
requires very little overhead since it only makes a decision when a process completes or a new
process is added. When a new process is admitted the SRTN algorithm only needs to compare the
currently executing process with the new process, ignoring all other processes currently waiting to
execute.
Advantages :
1. Very short processes get very good service.
2. The penalty ratios are small; this algorithm
works extremely well in most cases
3 . This algorithm provably gives the highest
throughput of all scheduling algorithms if the
estimates are exactly correct.

3.2.8 Multilevel Queue Scheduling
• Multilevel queue is not separate scheduling
algorithm but it works in conjunction with several
CPU scheduling algorithms. The processes can be
grouped according t o common characteristics.
• One type of multilevel queue is based on the
priority based system with different queues for each
priorty level.
• System consists of two types of processes or jobs :
Interactive and batch. Interactive jobs are shorter
and batch jobs are longer. Fig 421 shows
multilevel queue scheduling.
• To keep minimum response time for user,
interactive jobs are scheduled before the batch jobs.
So ready queue is partitioned into two separate
queue: interactive (foreground) and batch
(background). Each queue uses their own
scheduling algorithm.
Once the jobs assigns to the queue, it will remain in
that queue. Jobs never change the queue. Here we
assume that FCFS is applied to one queue and
round robin method is applied to another queue.
• The batch jobs are put in one queue called the
background queue while the interactive jobs are put
in a foreground queue. Batch jobs are scheduled by
first come first serve method and interactive jobs by
round robin method.
• The scheduler now has to decide which queue to
run. The methods are as follows:
1. Higher priority queues can be processed until
they are empty before the lower priority
queues are executed.
2. Each queue can be given a certain amount of
the CPU. Maybe, the interactive queue could
be assigned 75% of the CPU, with the batch
queue being given 25 %.
• It should also be noted that there can be many
other queues. Many systems will have a system
queue. This queue will contain processes that are
important to keep the system running. For this
reason these processes normally have the highest
priority.
• It should be also need to specify which queue a
process will be put to when it arrives to the system
and/or when it starts a new CPU burst.
Advantages:
1. It can be preemptive o r non-preemptive.
2. Short CPU bound processes are executed first.
3. Simple t o implement.
Disadvantage:
1. Queues require monitoring, which is a costly
activity.

3.2.9 Multilevel Feedback Queue Scheduling
• Multilevel Feedback Queue (MLFQ) allows moving
the processes between the queues. MLFQ has a
number of distinct queues; cache assigned a different
priority level. At any given time, a process that is
ready to run is on a single queue. MLFQ uses
priorities to decide which process should run at a
given time. A process with higher priority i s
selected for execution.
• Consider processes with different CPU burst
characteristics. If a process uses too much of the
CPU it will be moved to a lower priority queue.
This will leave I/O bound and interactive processes
in the higher priority queue.
• Fig. 4.2.2 shows multilevel feedback queue
scheduling.
MLFQ also uses concept of aging to prevent
starvation. The processes with lower priority will
move towards the higher priority queue in aging
concept. The key to MLFQ scheduling lies in how
the scheduler sets priorities. Rather than giving a
fixed priority to each process, MLFQ varies the
priority of a process based on its observed behavior.
• Assume we have three queues (Q0, Q 1 and Q2). Q0
is the lowest priority queue and Q2 is the highest
priority queue. The process enters at the highest
priority (Q2). After a single time-slice of 10 ms, the
scheduler reduces the process's priority by one, and
thus the job is on Q1. After running at Ql for a
time slice, the job is finally lowered to the lowest
priority in the system (QO), where it remains.
• Following parameters are defined by scheduler for
implementing MLFQ:
1 . Number of queue required.
2. Scheduling algorithm for each queue.
3. Method is required for finding to increase
and/or decrease priority o f processes

3.3 Deadlock

3.3.1 system Model
• A lack of process synchronization can result in two
extreme conditions are deadlock or starvation.
Deadlock is the problem of multiprogrammed
system.
• Deadlock can b e defined as the permanent blocking
of a set of processes that either complete for system
resources. Deadlock is more serious than starvation.
• Deadlock can occur on sharable resources such as
files, printers, database, disks, tape drives, memory,
CPU cycles etc.
• A process i s in deadlock state if it was waiting for a
particular event that will not occur. In a system
deadlock, one o r more processes are deadlocked.
Deadlock Example
• Computer system is collection of limited/finite
number o f resources. These resources are distributed
among a number o f competing processes.
Resources are of two types :
1. Reusable resources
2. Consumable resources.
• Reusable resource is used only by one process at a time. Process can release resource after use.
Processors, I/O channel, I/O device, files, database, primary and secondary memory, semaphore are
example of the reusable resource.
• Consumable resource is one that can be created and destroyed. There is no limit on the number of
consumable resources o f a particular type.
• An interrupt, messages, signals and messages in I/O buffers are examples of consumable resources.
• Process utilize the resources in the following sequence :
1. Request for resource
2 . Use of resource
3 . Resource release.
• Process uses system call for requesting the resource. After allocating resource to the process, it use or
operate the resource.
• The process releases the resource after use.
• If the resource i s not available when it i s requested, the requesting process i s forced to wait.
• Fig. 4.3.1 shows the deadlock with 4 process. 
Process 1 is holding resource 1 and requesting resource 2; process 2 is holding resource 2 and
requesting resource 3; process 3 is holding resource 3 and requesting resource 4. Process 1 is holding
resource 4 also.
• Here deadlock occurs because none of the processes can proceed because all are waiting for a
resource held by another blocked process.
• To break this situation, one of the process release the resource.
• Operating system must be handle the deadlock situation. OS detect the deadlock and solve the
deadlock problems

3.4.3 Necessary Condition for Deadlock
• Following four conditions are necessary for
deadlock to exist.
1. Mutual exclusion 2 . Hold and wait
3. No preemption 4 . Circular wait
1. Mutual exclusion : A resource may be acquired
exclusively by only one process at a time.
2. Hold and wait: Processes currently holding
resources that were granted earlier can request
new resources.
3. No preemption : Once a process has obtained a
resource, the system cannot remove it from the
process control until the process has finished
using the resource.
4. Circular wait: A circular chain o f hold and wait
condition exists in the system.
ll four of these conditions must be present for a
resource deadlock to occur. If one of them is absent,
n o resource deadlock is possible.

4.3.4  Deadlock Handing- Deadlock Prevention
• To prevent a deadlock, the OS must eliminate one
o f the four necessary conditions.
1. Mutual exclusion 2 . Hold and wait
3 . No preemption 4 . Circular wait
1. Mutual exclusion: It is necessary in any computer
system because some resources (memory, CPU)
must be exclusively allocated to one user at a
time. No other process can use a resource while
i t is allocated t o a process.
2. Hold and wait: If a process holding certain
resources is denied a further request, it must
release its original resources and if required
request them again.
3. No preemption: It could be bypassed by allowing
the operating system to deallocate resources from
process.
4. Circular wait: Circular wait can be bypassed if
the operating system prevents the formation of a
circle.
• A deadlock is possible only if all four of these
conditions simultaneously hold in the system.
• Prevention strategies ensure that at least one of the
conditions is always false.

3.4.5 Deadlock Avoidance
 Deadlock avoidance depends on additional
information about the long term resource needs of
each process. The system must be able to decide
whether granting a resource is safe o r not and only
make the allocation when it is safe.
• Fig. 4.3.9 shows safe and unsafe state.
When a process is created, it must declare its
maximum claim, ie. the maximum number of unit
resource. The resource manager can grant the
request if the resources are available.
For example, if process 1 requests a resource held by process 2 then make sure that process 2 is not
waiting for resource head by first process 1.

3.3.5.1 anker's Algorithm
• Banker's algorithm is the deadlock avoidance algorithm. Banker's is named because the algorithm is
modeled after a banker who makes loads from a pool of capital and receives payments that are
returned to that pool.
• Algorithm is check to see if granting the request leads to an unsafe state. If it does, the request is
denied. If granting the request leads to a safe state, it is carried out.
• The Dijkstra proposed an algorithm to regulate resource allocation to avoid deadlocks. The banker's
algorithm is the best known of the avoidance method.
• B y using avoidance method, the system is always kept in a safe state.
• It is easy to check if a deadlock is created by granting a request, deadlock analysis method i s used for
this.
• Deadlock avoidance uses the worst-case analysis method to check for future deadlocks.
• Safe state: There is at least one sequence of resource allocations to processes that does not result in a
deadlock.
• System is in a safe state only if there exist a safe sequence. A safe state i s not a deadlocked state.
• Deadlocked state is a n unsafe state. It does mean the system is in a deadlock.
• A s long as the state is safe, the resource manager can be guaranteed t o avoid a deadlock.
• Initially the system i s in a safe state. When process requests a resource and that resource i s available
then the system must decide whether the resources can be allocated immediately or process must
wait.
• If system remains in safe state after allocating resource then only O S allocates resources to process.
• Banker algorithm uses following data structures.
1. Allocation: Allocation is a table in which row represents process and column represents resources (R).
alloc [i, il = Number o f unit o f resource R; held b y process Pi-
2. Max: Max be the maximum number of resources that process requires during its execution.
• Need (claim) : It i s current claim of a process, where a process's claim i s equal t o its maximum need
minus its current allocation.
Need = Max - Allocation
• Available : There will b e number of resources still available for allocation. This is equivalent to the
total number of resources minus the sum of the allocation t o all processes in the system.
Available = Number of resources - Sum o f the allocation t o all process
- Number of resources - Allocation (P)
• Each process cannot request more that the total number of resources i n the system. Each process must
also guarantee that once allocated a resource, the process will return that resource to the system
within a finite time.
Weakness of Banker's algorithm
1. It requires that there be a fixed number of resources to allocate.
2. The algorithm requires that users state their maximum advance. needs (request) in
3. Number of users must remain fixed.
4. The algorithm requires that the bankers grant all requests within a finite time.
5. Algorithm requires that process returns all resource within a finite time.


Unit 4: Memory Management

4.1 Basic Memory Management
The memory management modules of an operating system are concerned with the management of primary memory. In a multiprogramming system, the user part of memory must be further subdivided to accomodate multiple processes. The task of subdivision is carried out dynamically by the operating system and is known as memory management.
Memory consists of a large array of words or bytes each with its own address. Memory that the processors directly access for instructions and data.

4.1.1 Functions of Memory Management
1. Keeping track of the status of each memory
location. Whether the memory location is
allocated or free.
2. Determining allocation policy for memory.
3. Memory allocation technique, memory allocation
information must be updated.
4. Deallocation technique and policy. A process
nay release the allocated memory
• Central processing unit fetches instructions from
memory according to the value o f program counter.
These instructions may cause additional loading
from and storing to specific memory addresses. In
this section, we discuss the memory related
parameters like address binding, physical address,
logical address and dynamic loading etc.

4.1.2 Swapping
• Keeping all processes in memory all the time
requires a large amount of main memory. For
execution of the process, it must be swapped.
• Swapping is method of temporarily removing
inactive process/programs from the physical
memory.
• Inactive program means, which is neither executing
on the CPU, nor performing an I/O operation.
• Fig. 5.1.4 shows swapping.
When process P2 send requests for an 1/O
operation, OS blocked Pz process and will not
return to the ready state for long period of time.
Process P is in blocked state. Process manager
place the process P2 in blocked state and inform t o
the memory manager regarding this action.
• Process manager moves a blocked process P 1 into
the ready state and inform to memory manager.
Process P, is loaded into main memory by memory
manager when there is space available.
• Swapped out process is stored on the secondary
storage disk. It contains executable image with code,
data and stack.
• Relocation hardware supports for swapping.
Because o f address binding problem, swapping i s
difficult without relocation hardware.
• Round robin and priority based CPU scheduling
algorithm uses the swapping concept.
• Time sharing system uses swapping. In time
sharing, kernel can estimate when a program is
likely to b e scheduled next.
 swapped out process will occupy same memory
location when process swap in by OS. But this
totally depends on address binding. If address
binding is load time or assembly time, then
swapped out process uses same memory location
when swap-in. But execution-time binding uses
different memory location.
• Secondary storage is required to implement the
swapping technique.
• Content switching time increases when swapping
increases. Major part of the swap time is transfer
time. Swapping increases the operating system
overhead due to the disk I/O involved.
• When swapping creates multiple holes in memory,
it is possible to combine them all into one by
moving all the processes to one side of memory.
This technique is known as memory compaction.
• Compaction requires a lot of CPU time, so most
operating systems not used this technique.
• Compaction means movement of processes in the
memory during their execution. It is sometimes
called dynamic relocation of a program.

4.2 Fixed Partitioning
• In a fixed size partitioning of the main memory all
partitions are of the same size. The operating
ystem divides main memory into a number of
fixed size partition. Each partition holds a single
program.
• Fixed sized partitions are relatively simple to
implement. Degree of multiprogramming depends
o n the number o f partitions.
• Normally main memory is divided into two
partitions:
1 . For resident program 2. For user processes
• Batch operating system uses the fixed size partition
scheme. The operating system keeps the record of
memory allocation and deallocation in the form of
table. Initially all the memory is available for user
processes.
• When the process arrives in the system and needs
memory, operating system search for large hole for
this process. Hole is one large block of free
available memory. If any free hole i s found, process
is allocated to the free hole of memory a s is needed.
• After allocating number of holes for the processes, a
set of various size holes is scattered throughout
memory at any given time. When a process arrives
and searches for (memory) set of holes. But the
holes must be large enough to accomodate the
process.
• Fixed sized partitions are simple to implement. Any
process whose size is less than or equal to the
partition size can be loaded into any available
partition.
• Fig. 5.2.1 shows an example of fixed partitioning of
a memory.
There are two difficulties with the use o f equal size
fixed partitions:
1 . A program may be too big to fit into a partition.
2 . Memory utilization is extremely inefficient.
First difficulty is solved by using overlays. Overlays
involves moving data and program segments in and
out o f memory.
Advantages and disadvantages of fixed partition
1) Advantages
1. Simple to implement.
2. Does not require expertise t o understand and use
such a system.
3. Less overhead.
2) Disadvantages
1. Memory is not fully utilized.
2. Poor utilization of processors.
3 . User's process being limited to the size of
available main memory.
4. Requires contiguous loading of entire program

4.2.1 ynamic Memory Partitions
• Memory
partitions are of variable length and
number. Processes are loaded into the size nearest
to its requirements.
• Fig. 5.2.2 shows the effect of dynamic memory
partitioning. Initially in main memory, only OS is
loaded and rest of the memory is free. Memory size
is 6 4 Mbytes. How the process is loaded with
dynamic partitions is shown below. After loading
all the process some free space remains a t one side
of the memory.
• Four process/programs are loaded into memory.
These program starts loading where the O S ends.
After loading four programs, it leaves a hole at the
end of memory that is too small for a next process.
• Operating system swap out program 2 and leaves
sufficient room to load new program into memory.
The size of newly loaded program is smaller than
the program in memory. Again another small hole
is created.


4.3 Variable Partitioning
• The use of unequal size partitions provides a degree
of flexibility to fixed partitioning. In dynamic
partitioning, the partitions are of variable length
and number.
• I n noncontiguous memory allocation, a program is
divided into blocks that the system may place in
nonadjacent slots in main memory.
• This allocation method do not suffer from internal
fragmentation, because a process partition is exactly
the size o f the process.
• Fig. 5.3.1 shows noncontiguous memory allocation
method. Operating system maintain the table which
contains the memory areas allocated to process and
free memory. Memory management unit use this
information for allocating processes.
• Table contains information about memory starting
address for process/program and their size.
• CPU sends the logical address of the process to the
MMU and the MMU uses the memory allocation
information stored in the table for calculating logical
address. We called this address as effective memory
address of the data/instruction.

4.3.2 Fragmentation
• Fragmentation are of two types :
1. Internal fragmentation.
2. External fragmentation.
• In fragmentation, OS cannot use certain area of
available memory.
Internal fragmentation
• There is wasted space internal to a partition due to
the fact that the block of data loaded is smaller than
the partition i s called as internal fragmentation.
• Fig. 5.3.2 shows a n internal fragmentation
To keep track of this free hole is overhead for
system.
External fragmentation
• It occurs when enough total main memory space
exists to satisfy a request, but it is not contiguous,
storage is fragmentated into a large number of
small holes.
• Fig. 5.3.3 shows external fragmentation.
Following are the solution for the external
fragmentation:
1. Compaction
2. Logical address space o f a process/program

4.3.4 Compaction
• Compaction solves problem of
fragmentation. Fig. 5.3.4 shows compaction. Operating system moves all the free holes to one
side of main memory and creates large block of free
size.
• It must be performed on each new allocation of
process to memory or completion of process for
memory. System must also maintain relocation
information.
• All free blocks are brought together as one large
block of free space. Compaction requires dynamic
relocation.
• Compaction has a cost and selection of an optimal
compaction strategy is difficult. One method for
compaction is swapping out those processes that are
to be moved within the memory and swapping
them into different memory locations.
• Compaction is not always possible. Compaction is
time consuming method and wastage of the CPU
time.
Garbage collection
• Some programs use dynamic data structures. These
programs dynamically use and discard memory
space. Technically, the deleted data items release
memory locations.
• But, in practice the OS does not collect such free
space immediately for allocation. This is because 
hat affects performance. Such areas, therefore are
called garbage.
• When such garbage exceeds a certain threshold the
OS would not have enough memory available for
any further allocation.

4.3.5 Placement Algorithms
• In an environment that supports dynamic memory
allocation, the memory manager must keep a record
of the usage of each allocatable block of memory.
This record could b e kept by using almost any data
structure that implements linked lists.
• An obvious implementation i s t o define a free list of
block descriptors, with each descriptor containing a
pointer t o the next descriptor, a pointer t o the block
and the length of the block.
• The memory manager keeps a free list pointer and
inserts entries into the list in some order conductive
to its allocation strategy. A number of strategies are
used to allocate space to the processes that are
competing for memory.
• Fig. 5.3.5 shows the placement algorithm.
1. Best fit: The allocator places a process in the
smallest block of unallocated memory in which it
will fit. For example, suppose a process requests
12 kB of memory and the memory manager
currently has a list of unallocated blocks of 6 kB,
4 kB, 19 kB, 11 kB and 13 kB blocks. The best-fit
strategy will allocate 1 2 kB of the 1 3 kB block to
the process.
• Best fit chooses the block that is closest in the size
t o the request.
Problems of best fit
• It requires a n expensive search of the entire free list
to find the best hole.
• More importantly, it leads to the creation of lots of
little holes that are not big enough to satisfy any
requests. This situation is called fragmentation and is
a problem for all memory-management strategies,
although it is particularly bad for best-fit.
Solution: One way to avoid making little holes
is to give the client a bigger block than it asked
for. For example, we might round all requests up
to the next larger multiple of 64 bytes. That
doesn't make the fragmentation go away, it just
hides it. Unusable space in the form of holes is
called external fragmentation.
2 . Worst fit: The memory manager places
process in
the largest block of unallocated
memory available. The idea i s that this placement
will create the largest hold after the allocations,
thus increasing the possibility that compared to
best fit; another process can use the remaining
space. Using the same example as above, worst
fit will allocate 1 2 kB of the 19 kB block to the
process, leaving a 7 kB block for future use.
3. First fit : There may be many holes in the
memory, so the operating system, to reduce the
amount of time it spends analyzing the available
spaces, begins at the start of primary memory
and allocates memory from the first hole it
encounters large enough to satisfy the request.
Using the same example as above, first fit will
allocate 12 kB of the 14 kB block to the process.
4. Next fit: The first fit approach tends to fragment
the blocks near the beginning of the list without
considering blocks further down the list. Next fit
is a variant of the first-fit strategy. The problem
of small holes accumulating is solved with next
fit algorithm, which starts each search where the
last one left off, wrapping around to the
beginning when the end of the list is reached ( a
form of one-way elevator).
Notice in the diagram above that the best fit and
first fit strategies both leave a tiny segment of
memory unallocated just beyond the new process.

4.4 Free Space Management Techniques
• Space that is allocated t o files must b e managed and
space which is not allocated to any file must be
managed. To keep track of free disk space, the
system maintains a free space list. File allocation
table and disk allocation both are required to
manage free space properly.
• When a file is deleted, its disk space is added to the
free-space list.
• Following are the techniques used for free space
management:
1. Bit tables or bit vector
2. Chained free portions or linked list
3. Indexing o r grouping
4. Free block list or counting
1. Bit tables or bit vector
• Each block on the disk is represented by bit. It uses
vector chain for blocks. Free block is represented b y
o and used block represented by 1 .
• For example, consider a disk where blocks 3, 4, 5, 7,
9, 14, 15, 19, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 3 8 are free blocks
and rest of the blocks are allocated. The free space
is shown below:
111000101011110011101111111111000110000
• The memory required for a block bitmap = Disk
size / 8 x (block size of file system)
• Bit map requires extra space. For example :
Block size = 2'2 bytes
Disk size = 230 bytes
Block number (n) = Disk size
230 bytes
= 212 bytes
When bit table is stored into the memory, then
exhaustive search of the table can slow file system
performance. Most of the file system use auxiliary
data structure for bit table. File system also
maintain summary table. Summary table contains
sub-range, number of free blocks and maximum
sized contiguous number of free blocks.
• Summary table is used to store information about
contiguous free blocks. Whenever file system needs
a number of contiguous blocks, it can scan the
summary table to find an appropriate sub-range
and then search that sub-range.
• This method is used in Apple Macintosh.
Advantage:
a. Easy to find a free blocks
b. It is a s small as possible.
Disadvantage:
It may not b e feasible t o keep the bitmap i n memory
for large disks.
2. Link list
• I n this method, all free space disk blocks are linked,
keeping a pointer to the first free block. All file
allocation methods used link list free space
techniques.
• There is small space overhead because there is no
need for a disk allocation table. In the above
example, free blocks are 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 14, 15, 19, 30,
31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38. Here free block pointer is on
block number 3. Block 3 contains pointer to block 4,
block 4 contains pointer to block 5 and block 5
contains pointer t o block 7 and so on.
• This method is not efficient because to reach free
block 9 , we have to traverse block 3, 4, 5 and 7 then
w e will reach to block 9.
• Disk will become quite fragmented after some use.
Many portions will b e a single block long.
3. Grouping
• First free block contains the addresses of n free
blocks. The first n-1 of these blocks is actually free.
The last block also contains the address of another
n free block.
• Consider the free blocks: 3, 4, 5, 7 , 9, 14, 15, 19, 30,
31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38

4.5 irtual Memory
• Virtual memory is a method of using hard disk
space to provide extra memory. It simulates
additional main memory.
• In Windows operating system, the amount of virtual
memory available equals the amount of free main
memory plus the amount of disk space allocated to
the swap file.
• Fig. 4.8.1 shows logical view of virtual memory
concept.
A swap file is an area of your hard disk that is set
aside for virtual memory. Swap files can be either
temporary or permanent.
irtual memory is stored in the secondary storage
device. It helps to extend additional memory
capacity and work with primary memory to load
applications. The virtual memory will reduce the
cost of expanding the capacity of physical memory.
The implementations of virtual memory will
different for operating systems to operating system.
• Each process address space is partitioned into parts
that can be loaded into primary memory when they
are needed and written back to secondary storage
otherwise. Address space partitions have been used
for the code, data and stack identified by the
compiler and relocating hardware. The portion of
the process that is actually in main memory at any
time is defined to be the resident set of the process.
• The logical addressable space is referred to a s
virtual memory. The virtual address space is much
larger than the physical primary memory in a
computer system. The virtual memory works with
the help of secondary storage device and its speed
is low compared t o the physical storage location.
• Virtual memory uses two types of addresses :
Virtual address and physical address.
• Virtual address is referred by process and physical
address is actual address of the main memory.
• Whenever a process accesses a virtual address, the
system must translate it to a physical address.
Virtual memory system uses special purpose
hardware. This hardware is called as memory
management unit.
• Most virtual memory system use a technique called
paging. The virtual address space is divided into
fixed size units called pages. The corresponding
units in the physical memory are called page
frames. The pages and page frames are normally
the same size. The area on a hard disk that stores
page frames is usually called the paging file or the
swap file.
• Fig. 5.5.2 shows concept of virtual memory.
• When the system is ready to run a process, the
system loads the process code and data from
secondary storage into primary memory. Only a
small portion of these needs to be in primary
memory at once for the process to execute. The
success of implementing virtual memory system is
how to map virtual addresses t o physical addresses.
Because processes reference only virtual addresses.
Virtual memory can be implement in one o f two ways :
1 . Paging 2. Segmentation
 Following are the situations, when entire program is not required to load fully.
1. User written error handling routines are used only when an error occurs in the data or
computation.
2. Certain options and features o f a program may b e used rarely.
3. Many tables are assigned a fixed amount of address space even though only a small amount of the
table i s actually used.
4. Many routines are commonly used at mutually exclusive times during a run.
• Virtual memory makes the task of programming much easier. Virtual memory is commonly
implemented by demand paging. Virtual memory mechanism bridges the size and speed gaps
between the main memory and secondary storage and is usually implemented in part by software
technique.
Benefits
1. Less 1/O needed to load/swap a process.
2. Degree of multiprogramming can be increased.
3. A program's logical address space can be larger
than physical memory.

4.6 Paging 
 In paging, operating system divides each incoming
programs into pages of equal size. The sections of a
disk are called block or sectors. The sections of
main memory are called page frames. One sector
will hold one page of job instructions and fit into
one page frame of memory.
• In paging, logical address space of a program
can be noncontiguous. It solves
external
fragmentation problem.
• The relation between virtual addresses and
physical memory addresses given by page table.
• Fixed sized blocks are called frames and breaking of
logical memory into blocks of same size called
pages.
• Memory manager prepares following things before
executing a program:
1. Find out the number o f pages in the program.
2. Free space in the main memory.
3. Loading o f all the programs pages into memory.
• Pages are not loaded continuously in main memory.
Each page can be stored in any available page
frame anywhere in main memory. Memory manager
keeps the track of pages of program. Paging avoids
external fragmentation and need for compaction.
• Memory manager uses three tables to keep track of
process and memory.
. Job table : It stores the size of the active job
and memory location where its page table is
stored.
2. Page map table: It contains vital information
about each page. PMT contains apage number
and corresponding page frame memory
address. It includes only one entry per page.
Page numbers are in sequential order.
3. Memory map table : MMT is used to store
page frame location and its status.
• Page size depends upon underlying hardware.
Operating system maintains a page table for each
process. The page table shows the frame location for
each page of a process. Fig. 5.6.1 shows the virtual
address format for paging system.
Processor hardware performs the logical to physical
address translation. Logical address contains page
number and offset. The physical address contains
frame number and offset. Offset is a relative factor.
I t i s used t o locate that line within its page frame.
• Fig. 5.6.2 shows address translation.
Suppose a system uses n-bit for representing both
physical and virtual address. The page number is
represented by the most significant bit (n - m bits)
and the displacement i s represented by m bit.
• The table, which holds virtual address to physical
address translations is called page table. As
displacement is constant, so only translation of
virtual page number to physical page is required
Fig 5.6.3 shows paging hardware. CPU generates
logical addresses containing page number and an
offset. This page number is used to retrieve the
frame number from a page table which gives the
base address s o the physical address is calculated a s
base + offset.
• Paging implementation requires CPU and operating
system support. Page table may itself be resident in
main memory.
• Active process is loaded into memory and it
occupies number of pages. This set of pages forms
its resident set. Hardware defined the page size.
• The processor generates virtual (logical) address and
it consists of two parts:
1 . Page number 2 . Page offset
• Page table contains page number and index frame
number. Page number is used as an index into a
page table.
• In case of simple partition, a logical address is the
location of a word relative to the beginning o f the
program the processor translates that into a real
address.
But in the paging method the logical t o real address
translation is still done by processor hardware. The
processor must know how to access the page table
of the current process.
• The operating system partitions the memory into
areas called page frames. Each page frame size is
equal. Page size is normally power of 2.
• Fig. 5.6.4 shows a paging model. Operating system
maintains the free frame list. During execution of
process the memory management unit consults the
page table t o perform address translation.
The physical address is the portion of the primary
memory allocated to the process. The page frames
allocated to the process need not be contiguous.
• The aim of the paging system is to identify the set
o f pages needed for the process current locality and
then to load only those pages into page frames in
primary memory.
• The logic of the address translation process in
paged system i s shown in the following Fig. 5.6.5.
• For example, the virtual address is 03200H. This
virtual address is split by hardware into the page
number and offset within that page. High order
12 bit is used as page number ie. 003H and lower
order 1 2 bit is used for the offset i.e. (200H).
• Page number i s used to index the page table and to
obtain the corresponding physical frame number
(FFFH). This value is then concatenated with the
offset to produce the physical address (FFF200H)
which is used to reference the target item in
memory.
• The operating system keeps track of the status of
each page frame by means of a physical memory
map that may be structured as a static table. The
logical address space may be the same size as the
physical address space or it may be smaller.
• If logical address space is small, it prevents one
process from monopolizing all of the memory. If the
logical address space is larger than the physical
Advantages
1. It is compact and support sparse address space.
2. It easily manage the memory.
3. It reduce table fragmentation.
Disadvantages
1 . Overhead due to one more page table.
2. On TLB miss, two loads from memory will be
required to get the right address translation
information from the page table.

4.7 Segmentation 
n segmentation, a program's data and instructions
are divided into blocks called segments. A segment
i s a logical entity in a program.
• Fig. 5.7.1 shows programmer's view.
Logical view : A process consists of a set of
segments.
• Physical view: It consists of non-adjacent areas of
memory allocated to segments.
• All segment size may be equal or may not be equal.
Segmentation support user view of memory.
Fig. 5.7.1 shows programmer's view of a program.
• Segmentation can be implemented with or without
paging.
• Collection of segment is called as logical address
space. Each segment is identified by its name.
• Processor generates logical addresses. These
addresses consists of a segment number and an
offset into the segment. Segment number i s used as
an index to segment page table.
• Fig. 5.7.2 shows logical address.
egment names are normally symbolic names.
• Operating system maintains a segment table for
each process. It is usually stored in main memory
a s a segment that is not t o be loaded as long a s the
process can run.
• Each entry in the segment table has a segment base
and a segment limit. The base field contains the
segment relocation register for the target segment.
The segment limit field contains the length of the
segment.
• Fig. 5.7.3 shows an address
segmentation.
translation
in
• Segment table contains the physical address of the
start o f the segment. Then add the offset to the base
and generate the physical address.
• If the required reference is not found in one of the
segment registers, then error is generated. At the
same time, operating system
does lookup in
segment table and loads new segment descriptor
into the register.
Advantages
1. It provides virtual memory.
2 Allows dynamic segment growth.
3. Segmentation assists dynamic linking.
4. Segmentation i s visible.

Disadvantages
1. Maximum size of a segment is limited by the
size o f main memory.
2. Difficulty to manage variable size segments on
secondary storage.
3. Fragmentation and complicated memory
management.

4.8 age Replacement Algorithm
• When a page fault occurs, page replacement
algorithms are used for loading the page in memory
and n o free page frame exist in memory.
• Page fault occurs if a running process references a
nonresident page.
• The goal of a replacement strategy is to minimize
the fault rate. To evaluate a replacement algorithm,
following parameters are used :
• 1. The size of a page 2. A set of reference strings
3 . The number of page frames.
• Given these inputs, we can determine the number
of page faults and hence the page-fault rate. A
reference string is a list of pages in order of their
reference by the processor.
• When we find that a page frame reference is in
main memory then we have a page hit and when
page fault occurs we say it is page miss. A poor
choice of page replacement algorithm may result in
lot o f page misses.
• Page replacement algorithm deals with how the
kernel decides which page reclaim. Operating
systems selects the local or global page replacement
policy. Local replacement policy allocates a certain
number o f pages t o each process. If a process needs
new page, it must replace one of its own pages. If
the O S uses a global policy, it can take a page from
any process, using global selection criteria.
• UNIX OS uses global page replacement policy.

4.8.1 First-In-First-Out
• FIFO page replacement algorithm removes the
pages that have been in memory the longest. Here
system keeps track of
the order in which pages
enter primary memory.
When page must be replaced, the oldest page is selected. System maintain a FIFO queue of pages.
Pages are inserted a t the tail o f the queue.
• FIFO algorithms interfere with the locality o f the process.
• Consider the reference string : 1 , 2 , 3, 4, 2, 5, 3 , 4 , 2, 6, 7, 8, 7, 9, 7, 8, 2, 5, 4, 9
• Page frame size = 3

4.8.2 LRU Page Replacement Algorithm
• LRU stands for least recently used. This replacement policy chooses to replace the page which has not
been referenced for the longest time. This policy assumes the recent past will approximate the
immediate future. The operating system keeps track o f when each page was referenced by recording
the time of reference or by maintaining a stack of references.
• System must maintain a time stamp for every page that indicates the time of the last access. When
deciding which page t o remove, the operating system must scan all the pages of memory for finding
the oldest time stamp. Instead o f keeping an extra time stamp bits, LRU i s implement by maintaining
pages in an ordered list.
• System can manage LRU with a list called the RU stack o r the paging stack. In the LRU stack, the
first entry describes the page referenced least recently, the last entry describes to the last page
referenced. If a page is referenced, move it to the end o f the list.
• LU algorithm does not interfere with the locality o f the process.
• Consider the reference string : 1 , 2, 3 , 4 , 2, 5 , 3, 4, 2, 6 , 7, 8 , 7 , 9, 7 , 8, 2, 5, 4, 9
• Page frame size = 3

4.8.3 LRU Approximation Algorithms
• LRU is a desirable algorithm to use, but it is expensive to implement directly. It is often
approximated. By using one reference bit, user can do a second-chance or clock replacement
algorithm.
• Page frames are arranged in circular list. Initially each reference bit is set to 0. It is set to 1 any time
the page i s referenced. Algorithm uses pointer t o points to the next candidate for a page replacement.
• When a page replacement is needed, the frame pointed to is considered a s a candidate. If its reference
bit i s 0 , it is selected. If its bit i s 1, the bit is set to 0, and the pointer is incremented to examine the
next frame. This continues until a frame is found with a reference bit of 0. This may require that all
frames be examined; bringing us around to the one we started with.
Second chance replacement
• In some books, the second chance replacement policy is called the clock replacement policy. In the
second chance page replacement policy, the candidate pages for removal are consider in a round
robin matter and a page that has been accessed between consecutive considerations will not be
replaced.
• The page replaced is the one that, considered in a round robin matter. It has not been accessed since
its last consideration.
• Working :
1. Add a "second chance" bit to each memory frame.
2. Each time a memory frame is referenced, set the "second chance" bit to ONE (1) - this will give the
frame a second chance...
3. A new page read into a memory frame has the second chance bit set to ZERO (0)
4 . When you need to find a page for removal, look in a round robin manner in the memory frames:
i. If the second chance bit is ONE, reset its second chance bit (to ZERO) and continue.
ii. If the second chance bit is ZERO, replace the page in that memory frame.

4.8.4 Optimal Page Replacement
• The data which will not b e accessed permanently or for a longest time should b e replaced in optimal
page replacement algorithm.
• Optimal page replacement algorithm gives less page fault as compared to FIFO and LRU. This
algorithm never suffer from Belady's anomaly.
• Use of this page-replacement algorithm guarantees the lowest possible page-fault rate for a fixed
number of pages
• The key distinction between FIFO and optimal i s that FIFO uses the time when a page was brought
into memory whereas optimal uses the time when a page is t o be used.
• It is difficult to implement because of future reference.
• Consider the reference string : 1, 2, 3, 4, 2, 5 , 3, 4, 2, 6, 7, 8 , 7, 9, 7, 8, 2, 5, 4, 9
• Page frame size = 3
Advantages:
1. It has lowest page fault rate.
2. Optimal never suffer from Belady's anomaly.
3. Used for comparison studies.
Disadvantages :
1. Difficult to implement.
2. It requires future reference string.




Unit 5: File Management


5.1 File 
5.1.1 File Concept
• Storing and retrieving information is the necessity
of all computer application. There are three
problems which occur while storing and retrieving
information.
1. A process can store limited amount of
information within its own address space when a
process is executed.
2. When process gets terminated information gets
lost.
3. It is necessary for multiple processes to access
the information a t same time.
• To overcome the above problems information must
b e stored on files. File management is the most
visible service of an operating system. Computer
can store information on various storage media such
as tapes, disks etc.
• A file is a collection of related information defined
by its creator. A file may be the collection of
various types of data depending upon data types.
In general file is a collection of bits, bytes, lines or
records the meaning of which is defined by the
creator.

5.1.2 File Attributes
• A file attribute may vary from one O.S to another.
But typically consists of these :
• Name: The name attribute is specified by the user
which is the information kept in human readable
form. A file is named for the convenience of its
human users.
 Identifier : I t i s a unique tag o r a number which is
used to identify file within the file system.
• Type: It specifies the file type that i s supported by
the file system such as document file, image file etc.
• Size: This attribute specifies the size of the file on
the system. It may be stored in the form of bytes,
kilobytes, megabytes etc.
• Location: This information specifies where exactly
the file i s stored on the device.
• Protection : It is done by means of access
permission or password. It is usually a secret code
used by the user to protect his/ her file/data.
• Time, date and user identifier: This information
may be kept for monitoring the usage of file/data.
And also can b e used for protection and security
purpose.

5.1.3 File Type 
Executable file : It is the series of code section
that the loader can bring into the memory and
execute.
2 . Object file : I t i s the sequence o f bytes organized
into blocks, understandable by system linker.
ource file: It is the sequence of subroutines
and functions each of which is further organized
a s declaration followed by executable statements.
4. Batch file: It is the collection of the commands
t o the command interpreter.
5. Text file: It is the sequence of characters
organized into lines.
6. Library files: It is collection of library functions
for the program.

5.1.4 File Operations
• The O.S. can provide system calls for doing file
operations.
1. Creating a file: Two steps are necessary for
creating a file :
• A space in the file system
• An entry for new file must be made in the
directory
2. Writing a file : While performing the write
operation, the system call is activated which
specifies the name of the file and the information
to be written in the file. The system finds out the
directory t o find out the location of the file when
we specify the name of the file. The pointer is
the logical reference, which is used when the
directory entry is done. It is necessary to store a
pointer to the end of current file. Using this
pointer information the address of the next block
can be easily derived and the information can b e
written to the specified file. The pointer
information must be updated as soon a s the
write operation is performed.
3. Reading a file: This operation reads the data
from the file. The system call is specifies the
name and location where read operation is to b e
performed. Again the directory is searched for
associated entry and the system needs to keep
the read pointer to the location in the file where
the next read is t o take place.
4. Repositioning within the file A directory is
searched for the appropriate entry and current
file position is set to a given value. This file
operation is also known as "file seek".
5. Deleting a file: The system call searches the
directory entry for the specified file to b e deleted
from the file system.
6. Truncating a file : Sometimes a user may want
to erase the contents of a file but keep its
attributes. In these cases truncating is done, this
allows attributes to remain unchanged.
• These all operations are those which are always
required. Other common operations are appending
renaming copying etc.


5.1.5 File System Structures
• Structure of a file is of mainly three types. Some
files store data plainly that is one by one character
o r numbers are stored in other types there might b e
different arrangements made by the file system.
Files can be structured in a different ways. Here are
some common possibilities following are three
major file structures :
1) Unstructured sequence of bytes (byte sequence)
2) Sequence of fixed length of records (record
sequence)
3) Tree records of different or may be of same
length (tree sequence)
Fig. 6.1.1 shows the type of file structures.
• In first type of file structure contents are stored in
the form of byte i.e. sequence of zero and one.
though this is a n binary file its contents from user
point of view is a normal file so we can say that
internally data is stored in byte but user program
make these file accessible and readable by user.
• In the next type where data is stored in the form of
records. Records are collection of collective data
means detail of one employee like employee code,
name, salary, address etc. could be form of one
record.
• The third type is critical means used in commercial
applications means data searching is quite tedious.
In this type a s data is hierarchical order.


5.2 Access Methods 

5.2.1 Sequential Access Method
• The sequential access method is the simplest
method. Information in a file is processed in order
one record after the other the bulk of operation on
the file is read and writes. In a read operation "read
next "reads the next portion of file and
automatically advances a file pointer. Similarly the
write operations "write next "appends to the end of
the file and advance to the end of newly written
material ie. the new end of the file.
Sequential Access Method
• The sequential access method is the simplest
method. Information in a file is processed in order
one record after the other the bulk of operation on
the file is read and writes. In a read operation "read
next "reads the next portion of file and
automatically advances a file pointer. Similarly the
write operations "write next "appends to the end of
the file and advance to the end of newly written
material ie. the new end of the file.

5.2.2 Direct Access Method
• It is also called a s relative access method. A file is
made up of fixed length records that allows
program t o read and write records rapidly in n o
particular order. Direct access method is based on
disc types storage devices since disk allows random
access to file block. For direct access file is viewed
as no sequence of bocks or records.
• For eg. We may read block 14 then we may read
block 5 3 and then write block 7. There are no
restrictions on order of reading or writing files for
direct access.
• For direct access method the file operation must b e
modified to include the block number as a
parameter. Thus we have read 'n' or write 'n' where
n is the block number rather than read next or
write next. Table below shows the simulation of
sequential access o n direct access

5.2.3 wapping
• A process must reside in memory to be ready to
execute. A process can b e moved temporarily out of
memory to a backing store, and then brought back
into memory for continued execution. For e g : In a
multiprogramming environment when number of
processes is queued for execution and if the system
i s implemented with a round robin algorithm, then
when time quantum/time slice expires then the
process will be swapped out and the new process
will be swapped into the memory space that just
has been freed. The CPU scheduler selects the
process for scheduling. When the time slice or time
quantum gets over, the CPU switches to next job.
The Fig. 6.2.2 shows the swapping of two processes
using disk as backing store.
The swapping policy is used for priority based
scheduling algorithms.
If a higher priority process comes t o the system and
needs service, the memory manager can swap out
priority process and
execute the higher priority process. When higher
priority process finishes its execution the lower
priority process can be moved back into the system
continue with execution.
sometimes called "roll-in and roll-out". Swapping
involves a backing store which is generally a large
capacity disk. The system maintains the ready
queue which consists off processes ready to run.
Then the scheduler selects the process and
dispatcher gives the control o f CPU for execution.

5.2.4 Allocation Methods 
5.2.4.1  Contiguous Allocation
• I t requires that each file occupy a set of contiguous
block on disk. This address is defined linear
ordering ie. proceeding straight from one stage to
another. Note that with this ordering, accessing
block b+1 after the block b requires no head
movement. When head movement is needed, (i.e
only one sector of cylinder to next) it is only one
track. That is from last sector to the first sector of
next cylinder. Disk address and the length define
contiguous allocation of the file. If the file is n
blocks long and starts at location a then it occupies
a , a+1, at2,.. atn-1. The directory entry for each
file indicates the address of starting block and the
length of the area allocated for this file. Fig. 6.2.3
shows directory of each file indicating the address
o f starting block and the length of the area allocated
for this file. (See Fig. 6.2.3)
Advantages :
1. Accessing of a file that has been allocated
contiguously is easy.
2. Both sequential and direct access can be
supported by contiguously allocated.
Disadvantages:
1. In contiguous allocation, the problem is that one
couldn't predict or determine the space required
for the allocation of the file.
2. Even if the total amount of space needed for a
file is known in advance, tree allocation may be
inefficient because it may lead to external
fragmentation.
External Fragmentation
• External fragmentation exists when enough total
disk space exists to satisfy the request but it i s not
contiguous. Storage is fragmented into large number
o f small partitions depending upon the total amount
of disk storage and average file size; external
fragmentation may be either a minor or a major
problem.

5.2.4.2 Linked Allocation 
• The problems associated in contiguous allocation are resolved in linked allocation technique. In linked allocation each file is a linked list of disk blocks.The disk blocks are distributed anywhere on the
disk. The directory structure contains a pointer to the 1st and last block of the file ie. start and the 
end. Fig. 6.2.4 shows the linked allocation. 
 For eg. A file of 8 blocks which might start at block 2 4 and continue a t block 1 3 then block 6 , then block 15, then block 18, then block 27, then block 3 4 and finally block 35. Each block contains a pointer to the
next block. These pointers is not known to the users. To create a new file a new entry is created in the directory. Each directory has a pointer to 1st disk block of the file. Initially, when a new file is 
created the pointer is has null value indicating
empty file. The file gets extended according to the
pointer value of the next block. These blocks get
linked together with the help of the pointer value.
Advantages:
1. There is no external fragmentation wth linked
allocation. Any free block can be used to satisfy
the request. 
2. There i s no need of declaring the size of the file
when it is created. A file can continue growing
a s long as free blocks are available.

Disadvantages:
1. The major problem is, it can be used effectively
only for sequential access o f file.
2. Extra space required for pointer.
It is not reliable ie. If an pointer gets lost or
damaged it could not have access to that
particular block o r file.

5.2.4.3 Indexed Allocation
 Linked allocation cannot support efficient direct access because the pointer to blocks are scattered th the block themselves all over the disk and must be retrieved in order. Index allocation is the
solution to the problems of both the previous
techniques. It provides this solution by bringing the
entire pointers into one location called "index
block". Fig. 6.2.5 shows the indexed allocation.
 The directory comprises the address of index block.
Each file has its own index block which is an array
of disk block addresses. The n" entry in the index
block points to the n block of file. To find and
read the nth block we use the pointer ie. the nth
index block.
Advantages : • It supports the direct access without
suffering from external fragmentation and no extra
space required for pointer.
Disadvantage: • Index allocation thus suffers from
wasted space. The pointer overhead of index block is
generally greater than the pointer overhead of linked
allocation.
For eg. : In a common case where we have a file of
only 1 or 2 blocks, then with linked allocation we
lose the space of only 1 pointer per block but with
index allocation an entire index block must be
allocated even if only 1 or 2 pointers will be used,
so remaining space is on wastage



5.3 Directory Structure 
5.3.1 Single Level Directory Structure
• It is a simple directory structure where all the files
are present in the same directory. These directories
are very easy to understand. This directory has
some restrictions like if the number of files get
increases then the file names should b e unique
under same directory. Fig 6.3.1 shows the single
level directory structure.
There is another drawback that if single user works
on this single level system it may be difficult to
remember the names of the files, if the files are
more. Therefore the two major difficulties are
naming and grouping.
Advantages :
i. Single level directory is very simple, easy to
understand, maintain and easy t o implement.
ii. The software design is also very simple.
ili. The ability to locate files is very fast as there is
only one directory.
Disadvantages :
i . It is not used in multiuser system. For e.g. if two
users A and B use the same filename for
particular file then the file of user A or B may b e
overwritten.
ii. It is difficult to remember the names of the files
if the files are very large in quantity.

5.3.2 Two Level Directory Structure
• In two level directory structure, the system
maintains a master block that has one entry for each
user. This master block contains the addresses of
the directory of the users. In this system each user
has his/her own "user file directory"(UFD). When
user logs into the system the "master file
directory"(MFD) is searched. This MFD contains the
index names of the users with their account details.
Once login done 1st MFD and then UFD is
searched.
• See the Fig. 6.3.2, it indicates that there are different
users who have their own directories and their
respective files stored in their own directories. The
process is very simple that when user logs on
he/she can access only his/her own directory and of
course files present in it. There might be different
users like userl, user2, user3 etc. and it may contain
the files directories listed below. Always in UNIX
all the devices, directories, files each and every
object is treated a s file. An advantage of this type of
structure is isolation, which keep one user separate
from each user. But ultimately if two users need to
communicate with each other then it becomes
difficult. W e also call this structure as inverted root
tree structure.
• We use the terminology path name that is nothing
but the exact location of the file where it i s placed.
There could be the same file name for different
user. This structure does efficient searching. As
different users are there, grouping cannot b e done.

5.3.3 Tree Structured Directories
• A tree is the most common and popular directory
structure. It is very useful because it solves the
problem o f grouping. It can group different users or
directories. The tree has a root directory and every
file in the system has a unique path name. A
directory contains a set of files or sub directories.
All directories have the same internal organization.
One bit in each directory entry defines the entry as
a file or as a subdirectory. These subdirectories
further may have files or again some directories.
Each process has a current directory. This helps
users to organize their data in a particular and
efficient manner. Path describes where exactly that
tile or directory is stored. Path names can be of two
types absolute and relative.
• An absolute path name begins at the root and
follows a path down t o the specified file giving the
directory names on the path. A relative path name defines path from the current directory
The important issue i s how t o delete a file directory
if it already contains subdirectory or may be files.
Some O.S. directly allows deleting this type of
directory, But other O.S do not allow the same
thing. If a directory is empty, its entry in the
directory can simply be deleted. If the directory to
be deleted is not empty, the none of the two
approaches can be done. User must first delete all
the files and sub directories in that directory. If a
request is made to delete a directory, the entire
directory's files and subdirectories are also to b e
deleted.










































