Unit 1: Software Development Process

1.1 Definition of Software and Software
Engineering

Software : Software is nothing but a collection of
computer programs and related documents that are
intended to provide desired features, functionalities
and better performance.

Software Engineering : “Software engineering is a
discipline in which theories, methods and tools are
applied to develop professional software product.”

Attributes of Good Software : There are some
essential attributes of good software and those are
(1) Maintainability : Sometimes there is a need to
make some modifications in the existing
software. A good software is a software which
can be easily modified in order to meet the
changing needs of the customer.
(2) Usability : It is the ability of the software being
useful. For making the software useful it is
necessary that it should have proper GUI and
documentation.
(3) Dependability : The dependability is a property
that includes reliability, security and safety of
software. In other words the developed software
product should be reliable and safe to use; it
should not cause any damage or destruction.
(4) Efficiency : The software should be efficient in
its performance and it should not waste the
memory.

1.2 Software as Layered Approach
 Software engineering is a layered technology. Any
software can be developed using these layered
approaches. Various layers on which the technology
is based are quality focus layer, process layer,
methods layer, tools layer.(Refer Fig 1.2.1)
· A disciplined quality management is a backbone of
software engineering technology.
· Process layer is a foundation of software
engineering. Basically, process defines the
framework for timely delivery of software.
· In method layer the actual method of
implementation is carried out with the help of
requirement analysis, designing, coding using
desired programming constructs and testing.
· Software tools are used to bring automation in
software development process.
· Thus software engineering is a combination of
process, methods, and tools for development of
quality software.

1.3 Characteristics of Software Engineering
Software is engineered, not manufactured
1) Software development and hardware
development are two different activities.
2) A good design is a backbone for both the
activities.
3) Quality problems that occur in hardware
manufacturing phase cannot be removed easily.
On the other hand, during software development
process such problems can be rectified.
4) In both the activities, developers are responsible
for producing qualitative product.
· Software does not ware out
1) In early stage of hardware development process
the failure rate is very high because of
manufacturing defects. But after correcting such
defects the failure rate gets reduced.
2) The failure rate remains constant for some period
of time and again it starts increasing because of
environmental maladies (extreme temperature,
dusts, and vibrations).
3) On the other hand software does not get affected
from such environmental maladies. Hence ideally
it should have an “idealized curve”. But due to
some undiscovered errors the failure rate is high
and drops down as soon as the errors get
corrected. Hence in failure rating of software the
“actual curve” is as shown below :(Refer Fig 1.3.1)
4) During the life of software if any change is
made, some defects may get introduced. This
causes failure rate to be high.
5) Before the curve can return to original steady
state another change is requested and again the
failure rate becomes high 
6) Thus the failure curve looks like a spike. Thus
frequent changes in software cause it to
deteriorate.
7) Another issue with software is that there are no
spare parts for software. If hardware component
wears out it can be replaced by another
component but it is not possible in case of
software.
8) Therefore software maintenance is more difficult
than the hardware maintenance.
· Most software is custom built rather than being
assembled from components
1) While developing any hardware product firstly
the circuit design with desired functioning
properties is created. Then required hardware
components such as ICs, capacitors and registers
are assembled according to the design, but this is
not done while developing software product.
2) Most of the software is custom built.
3) However, now the software development
approach is getting changed and we look for
reusability of software components.
4) It is practiced to reuse algorithms and data
structures.
5) 6) Today software industry is trying to make library
of reusable components. For example : In today’s
software, GUI is built using the reusable
components such as message windows, pull
down menus and many more such components.
The approach is getting developed to use in-built
components in the software. This stream of
software is popularly known as component
engineering.

1.4 Types of Software
Based on changing nature of software, various types
of software are defined as follows -
1. System software -
It is collection of programs written to service
other programs.
Typical programs in this category are compiler,
editors and assemblers.
The purpose of the system software is to
establish a communication with the hardware.
2. Application software -
It consists of standalone programs that are
developed for specific business need.
This software may be supported by database
systems.
Engineering / Scientific software -
This software category has a wide range of
programs from astronomy to volcanology, from
automatic stress analysis to space shuttle orbital
dynamics and from molecular biology to
automated manufacturing.
This software is based on complex numeric
computations.
4. Embedded software -
This category consists of program that can
reside within a product or system.
Such software can be used to implement and
control features and functions for the end-user
and for the system itself.
5. Web applications -
Web application software consists of various
web pages that can be retrieved by a browser.
The web pages can be developed using
programming languages like JAVA, PERL, CGI,
HTML, DHTML.
6. Artificial Intelligence software -
This kind of software is based on knowledge
based expert systems.
Typically, this software is useful in robotics,
expert systems, image and voice recognition,
artificial neural networks, theorem proving and
game playing.

1.5 Software Development Framework 
 The Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) is the
logical process of developing any system.
· Using SDLC one can develop a system which
satisfies customer needs, can be developed within
the predefined schedule and cost.
· Normally the system analyst makes use of software
development life cycle for developing the
information systems.
· The SDLC is a linear or sequential model in which
output of previous phase is given as input to next
subsequent stage.
· Various phases of software development life cycle
are - (Refer Fig. 1.5.1)
1. Feasibility study : It is initial phase of software
development framework. In this phase, it is
decided whether to built the system or not.
2. Requirement gathering and analysis : The basic
requirements of the software project are
identified and analyzed in this phase.
3. Design : The model of the software system is
prepared in this phase.
4. Coding or implementation : Using the software
design the coding is done in this phase. Thus the
implementation model is prepared.
5. Testing and maintenance : The code is tested and
modified if required.

1.6 Software Process Framework
· The process framework is required for representing
the common process activities.
· As shown in Fig. 1.6.1, the software process is
characterized by process framework activities, task
sets and umbrella activities.
Process framework activities
· Communication
By communicating customer requirement
gathering is done.
· Planning - Establishes engineering work plan,
describes technical risks, lists resource requirements,
work products produced and defines work
schedule.
· Modeling - The software model is prepared by :
Analysis of requirements
Design
· Construction - The software design is mapped into
a code by :
Code generation
Testing
· Deployment - The software delivered for customer
evaluation and feedback is obtained.
Task sets - The task set defines the actual work done
in order to achieve the software objective. The task
set is used to adopt the framework activities and
project team requirements using :
Collection of software engineering work tasks
Project milestones
Software quality assurance points
Umbrella activities - The umbrella activities occur
throughout the process. They focus on project
management, tracking and control. The umbrella
activities are
1. Software project tracking and control - This is
an activity in which software team can assess
progress and take corrective action to maintain
schedule.
2. Risk management - The risks that may affect
project outcomes or quality can be analyzed.
3. Software quality assurance - These are activities
required to maintain software quality.
4. Formal technical reviews - It is required to
assess engineering work products to uncover
and remove errors before they propagate to next
activity.
5. Software configuration management - Managing
of configuration process when any change in the
software occurs.
6. Work product preparation and production - The
activities to create models, documents, logs,
forms and lists are carried out.
7. Reusability management - It defines criteria for
work product reuse.
8. Measurement - In this activity, the process can
be defined and collected. Also project and
product measures are used to assist the software
team in delivering the required software.

1.7 Process Model
· Definition of process model : The process model
can be defined as the abstract representation of
process. The appropriate process model can be
chosen based on abstract representation of process.
· The software process model is also known as
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) model or
software paradigm.
· Various types of process models are (Refer Fig 1.7.1)

1.7.1 Perspective Process Model

1.7.1.1 Waterfall Model
· The waterfall model is also called as
‘linear-sequential model’ or ‘classic life cycle model’.
· The software development starts with requirements
gathering phase. Then progresses through analysis,
design, coding, testing and maintenance.
· Fig. 1.7.2 illustrates waterfall model.
· In requirement gathering and analysis phase the
basic requirements of the system must be
understood by software engineer.
· The design is an intermediate step between
requirements analysis and coding. Design focuses
on program attributes such as –i) Data structure
ii) Software architecture iii) Interface representation
iv) Algorithmic details.
· Coding is a step in which design is translated into
machine-readable form. Programs are created in this
phase.
· Testing begins when coding is done. The purpose
of testing is to uncover errors, fix the bugs and
meet the customer requirements.
· Maintenance is the longest life cycle phase. When
the system is installed and put in practical use then
error may get introduced, correcting such errors and
putting it in use is the major purpose of
maintenance activity. Similarly, enhancing system’s
services as new requirements are discovered is
again maintenance of the system.
Advantages of waterfall model
1. The waterfall model is simple to implement.
2. For implementation of small systems waterfall
model is useful.
Disadvantages of waterfall model
1. It is difficult to follow the sequential flow in
software development process. If some changes
are made at some phases then it may cause some
confusion.
2. The requirement analysis is done initially and
sometimes it is not possible to state all the
requirements explicitly in the beginning. This
causes difficulty in the project.
The customer can see the working model of the
project only at the end. After reviewing of the
working model; if the customer gets dissatisfied
then it causes serious problems

1.7.1.2 RAD Model (Incremental Model)
· The RAD Model is a type of incremental process
model in which there is extremely short
development cycle.
· When the requirements are fully understood and
the component based construction approach is
adopted then the RAD model is used.
· Using the RAD model the fully functional system
can be developed within 60 to 90 days.
· Various phases in RAD are Requirements Gathering,
Analysis and Planning, Design, Build or
Construction and finally Deployment.
· Multiple teams work on developing the software
system using RAD model parallely.
In the requirements gathering phase the
developers communicate with the users of the
system and understand the business process
and requirements of the software system.
During analysis and planning phase, the
analysis on the gathered requirements is made
and a planning for various software
development activities is done.
During the design phase various models are
created. Those models are business model, data
model and process model.
The build is an activity in which working code
is generated. This code is well tested by its
team. The functionalities developed by all the
teams are integrated to form a whole.
Finally the deployment of all the software
components (created by various teams working
on the project) is carried out. (Refer Fig. 1.7.3)
Advantages of RAD Model
(1) Faster development cycle.
(2) Visualization of related routines periodically.
(3) Encourages user involvement.
(4) Low maintenance cost.

Disadvantages of RAD Model
(1) It has reduced scalability.
(2) Not appropriate when technical risks are high.
(3) This model requires heavily committed developer
and customers. If commitment is lacking then
RAD projects will fail.

1.7.1.3 Spiral Model 
· This model possess the iterative nature of
prototyping model and controlled and systematic
approaches of the linear sequential model.
· This model gives efficient development of
incremental versions of software. In this model, the
software is developed in series of increments.
· The sprial model is divided into a number of
framework activities. These framework activities are
denoted by task regions.
· Usually there are six tasks regions. The spiral
model is as shown in Fig. 1.7.4.
· Spiral model is realistic approach to development of
large-scale systems and software. Because customer
and developer better understand the problem
statement at each evolutionary level. Also risks can
be identified or rectified at each such level.
· In the initial pass, product specification is built and
in subsequent passes around the spiral the
prototype gets developed and then more improved
versions of software gets developed.
· During planning phase, the cost and schedule of
software can be planned and adjusted based on
feedback obtained from customer evaluation.
· In spiral model, project entry point axis is defined.
This axis represents starting point for different
types of projects.
· For instance, concept development project will start
at core of spiral and will continue along the spiral
path. If the concept has to be developed into actual
project then at entry point 2 the product
development process starts. Hence entry point 2 is
called product development project entry point. The
development of the project can be carried out in
iterations.
The task regions can be described as :
i) Customer communication - In this region, it is
suggested to establish customer communication.
ii) Planning - All planning activities are carried out
in order to define resources time line and other
project related activities.
iii) Risk analysis - The tasks required to calculate
technical and management risks are carried out.
iv) Engineering - In this task region, tasks required
to build one or more representations of
applications are carried out.
v) Construct and release - All the necessary tasks
required to construct, test, install the application
are conducted. Some tasks that are required to
provide user support are also carried out in this
task region.
vi) Customer evaluation - Customer’s feedback is
obtained and based on customer evaluation
required tasks are performed and implemented at
installation stage.
· In each region, number of work tasks are carried
out depending upon the characteristics of project.
For a small project relatively small number of work
tasks are adopted but for a complex project large
number of work tasks can be carried out.
· In spiral model, the software engineering team
moves around the spiral in a clockwise direction
beginning at the core.
Advantages of spiral model
1. This model has iterative nature. Hence
requirements can be identified at new iteration.
2. Requirement changes can be made at every stage
of new version.
3. Risks can be identified and reduced before they
get problematic.
4. The working model is available to the customer
at certain stage of iteration
Disadvantages of spiral model
1. This model is based on customer communication.
If the communication is not proper then the
product being developed is not up to the mark.
2. It demands considerable risk assessment. If the
risk assessment is done properly then only
successful product can be obtained

1.7.2 Specialized Process Model 

1.7.2.1 Component Based Development
· The commercial off-the-shelves components that are developed by the vendors are used during the
software built.
· These components have specialized targeted functionalities and well defined interfaces. Hence it is
easy to integrate these components into the existing software.
· The component based development model makes use of various characteristics of spiral model. This
model is evolutionary in nature. That means the necessary changes can be made in the software
during the each iteration of software development cycle.
· Before beginning the modeling and construction activity of software development the candidate
component must be searched and analyzed. The components can be simple functions or can be object
oriented classes or methods.
· Following steps are applied for component based development -
· Identify the component based products and analyze them for fitting in the existing application
domain.
· Analyze the component integration issues.
· Design the software architecture to accommodate the components
· Integrate the components into the software architecture.
· Conduct comprehensive testing for the developed software.
· Software reusability is the major advantage of component based development.
· The reusability reduces the development cycle time and overall cost.


1.7.2.2 Formal Methods Model
· This model consists of the set of activities in which the formal mathematical specification is used.
· The software engineers specify, develop and test the computer based systems using the mathematical
notations. The notations are specified within the formal methods.
· Cleanroom software engineering makes use of the formal method approach.
· The advantage of using formal methods model is that it overcomes many problems that we encounter
in traditional software process models. Ambiguity, incompleteness and inconsistency are those
problems that can be overcome if we use formal methods mode
· The formal methods model offers defect-free software. However there are some drawbacks of this
model which resists it from getting used widely. These drawbacks are
· The formal methods model is time consuming and expensive.
· For using this model, the developers need the
strong mathematical background or some extensive
training.
· If this model is chosen for development then the
communication with customer becomes very difficult (Refer Fig. 1.7.5)

1.8 Agile Software Development
· The agile processes are the light-weight methods
are people-based rather than plan-based methods.
· The agile process forces the development team to
focus on software itself rather than design and
documentation.
· The agile process make use of iterative method.
· The aim of agile process is to deliver the working
model of software quickly to the customer.
Agile Principles
· There are famous 12 principles used as agility
principles -
1. Satisfy the customer by early and continuous
delivery of valuable software.
2. The changes in the requirements must be
accommodated. Even though the changes occur
late in the software development process, the
agile process should help to accommodate them.
Deliver working software quite often. Within the
shorter time span deliver the working unit.
4. Business people and developers must work
together throughput the project.
5. Motivate the people who are building the
projects. Provide the environment and support to
the development team and trust them for the job
to be done.
The working software is the primary measure of
the progress of the software development.
7. The agile software development approach
promote the constant project development. The
constant speed for the development of the
product must be maintained.
8. To enhance the agility there should be
continuous technical excellence.
9. Proper attention to be given to technical
excellence and good design.
10. Simplicity must be maintained while developing
the project using this approach.
11. The teams must be the self-organizing team for
getting best architecture, requirements and
design.
12. At regular intervals the team thinks over the
issue of becoming effective. After the careful
review the team members adjusts their behavior
accordingly.

1.8.1 Agile Process and its Importance
Agile process is based on following assumptions
about software projects
It is difficult to predict the software requirements
in advance. Similarly the customer priority often
get changed.
2. It is difficult to predict how much design is
necessary before the implementation.
3. All the software development activities such as
analysis, design, construction and testing are just
difficult to predict.
Characteristics of agile process are -
1. Agile processes must be adaptable to technical
and environmental changes. That means if any
technological changes occur, then the agile
process must accommodate it.
2. The development of agile processes must be
incremental. That means, in each development
the increment should contain some functionality
that can be tested and verified by customer.
3. The customer feedback must be used to create
the next increment of the process.
4. The software increment must be delivered in
short span of time.
5. It must be iterative, so that each increment can
be evaluated regularly.
Features of agile process
The features of agile process models
The key features of an agile process model can be
summarised as follows :
· The software itself is the important measure of the
team’s progress, rather than documentation.
· The development team has autonomy to
determine how to structure and handle the
development work.
· Changes can be easily adapted.
· Customers can more easily examine the software
and provide feedback.
Merits :
1) Customer satisfaction can be attained by rapid
and continuous delivery of useful software.
2) Customer, developer and tester interact with each
other during software development process.
3) Continuous attention can be given for excellent
technical design and software quality.
4) Even late changes in requirements can be
accommodated.
Demerits :
1) There is lack of emphasis on necessary designing
and documentation during software development
process
2) The project can easily get off the track if customer
is not clear about his requirements.
Process Models
There are various agile process models -
1. Extreme Programming
2. Adaptive Software Development
3. Dynamic System Development Method(DSDM)
4. Scrum
5. Crystal

1.8.2 Extreme Programming 
Extreme Programming (XP) is one of the best known
agile methods. The extreme programming approach
was suggested by Kent Beck in 2000. The extreme
programming process is explained as follows -
· Customer specifies and priorities the system
requirements. Customer becomes one of the
important members of development team. The
developer and customer together prepare a
story-card in which customer needs are mentioned.
· The developer team then aims to implement the
scenarios in the story-card.
· After developing the story-card the development
team breaks down the total work in small tasks.
The efforts and the estimated resources required for
these tasks are estimated.
· The customer priorities the stories for
implementation. If the requirement changes then
sometimes unimplemented stories have to be
discarded. Then release the complete software in
small and frequent releases.
· For accommodating new changes, new story-card
must be developed.
· Evaluate the system along with the customer.
This process is demonstrated by the following
Fig. 1.8.1.

1.8.3 Adaptive Software Development
· The adaptive software development approach was
proposed by Jim Highsmith. This approach is useful
in building the complex software systems using
iterative apporach
· The focus of this method is on working in
collaboration and team self organization
· The life cycle of ASD consists of three phases of
software development and those are -
1. Speculation 2. Collaboration 3. Learning.
1. Speculation : This is an initial phase of the
adaptive software development process. In this
phase the adaptive cycle planning is conducted.
In this cycle planning mainly three types of
information is used such as - Customer's mission
statement, project constraints (delivery date, user
description, budgets and so on) and basic
requirements of the project.
2. Collaboration : The motivated people work in
collaboration to develop the desired software
product. In this phase collaboration among the
members of development team is a key factor.
For successful collaboration and coordination it is
necessary to have following qualities in every
individual -
Assist each other without resentment
Work hard.
Posses the required skill set.
Communicate problems and
help each other to accomplish
the given task.
Criticize without any hate.
3. Learning : As the team members go on
developing the components, the emphasize is on
learning new skills and techniques. There are
three ways by which the team members learn -
Focus groups : The feedback from the end-users
is obtained about the software component being
developed. Thus direct feedback about the
developed component can be obtained.
Formal technical review : This review for
software components is conducted for better
quality.
Postmortems : The team analyses its own
performance and makes appropriate
improvements. (Refer Fig. 1.8.2)

1.8.4 SCRUM
· SCRUM is an agile process model which is used
for developing the complex software systems
· It is a lightweight process framework that can be
used to manage and control the software
development using iterative and incremental
approach. Here the term lightweight means the
overhead of the process is kept as small as possible
in order to maximize productive time.
· This model is developed by Jeff Sutherland and Ken
Schwaber in 1995.
Principles
· Various principles using which the SCRUM works
are as given below -
1. There are small working teams on the software
development projects. Due to this there is
maximum communication and minimum
overhead.
2. The tasks of people must be partitioned into
small and clean packets or partitions.
3. The process must accommodate the technical or
business changes if they occur.
4. The process should produce software
increments. These increments must be inspected,
tested, documented and built on.
5. During the product building the constant testing
and documentation must be conducted.
6. The SCRUM process must produce the working
model of the product whenever demanded or
required.
· Various development activities (requirements
analysis, design, evolution and delivery) are guided
by SCRUM principles.
Development Activities
In SCRUM emphasize is on software process pattern.
The software process pattern defines a set of
development activities. Refer Fig. 1.8.3.
Various development activities in SCRUM are -
1. Backlog : It is basically a list of project
requirements or features that must be provided
to the customer. The items can be included in the
backlog list at any time. The product manager
analyses this list and updates the priorities as per
the requirements.
2. Sprint : These are the work units that are
needed to achieve the requirements mentioned in
the backlogs. Typically the sprints have fixed
duration or time-box (typically of 2 to 4 weeks).
Thus sprints allow the team members to work in
stable and short-term environment.
3. Meetings : These are 15 minutes daily meetings
to report the completed activities, obstacles and
plan for next activities. Following are three
questions that are mainly discussed during the
meetings
i) What are the tasks done since last meeting ?
ii) What are the issues (obstacles) that team is
facing ?
iii) What are the next activities that are planned ?
4. Demo : During this phase, the software
increment is delivered to the customer. The
implemented functionality which is demonstrated
to the customer. Note that demo focuses on only
implemented functionalities and not all the
planned functionalities (and yet to get
implemented) of the software product.
Roles :
1. Scrum Master - The Scrum master leads the
meeting and analyses the response of each team
member. The potential problems are discussed
and solved in the meeting with the help of
master.
2. Team Members - These are the persons working
in a team to develop the software solutions.
Advantages and Disadvantages :
Advantages :
1. SCRUM model brings transparency in project
development status.
2. It provides flexibility towards the changes.
3. There is improved communication, minimum
overhead in development process.
4. The productivity can be improved.
Disadvantages :
1. Some decisions are hard to track in fixed time
span.
2. There are problems to deal with non-functional
requirements of the system.

1.8.5 Dynamic System Development Method
(DSDM)
In this agile method, the project deadline is met using
the incremental prototyping approach. This is an
iterative development process.
The Dynamic System Development Method (DSDM)
consortium has defined an agile process model called
DSDM life cycle.
Various phases in this life cycle model are as
follows -
1. Feasibility study : By analyzing the business
requirements and constraints the viability of thee
application is determined in this phase.
2. Business study : The functional and
informational requirements are identified and
then the business value of the application is
determined. The basic application architecture is
decided in this phase.
3. Functional model iteration : The incremental
approach is adopted for development. The basic
functionalities are demonstrated to the customer
by building the suitable increments. The intention
of iterative cycle is to gather additional
requirements by eliciting the requirements from
the customer as each prototype is being
developed.
4. Design and build iteration : Each prototype is
revisited during the functional model iteration to
ensure that the business requirements are
satisfied by each software component. Sometimes
if possible, the design and build activities can be
carried out in parallel.
5. Implementation : In this phase, the software
increment is placed in the working environment.
If changes are suggested or if the end-user feels
it incomplete then the increment is placed in
iteration for further improvement.
The DSDM can be combined with XP method or ASD
concepts to create a combination model.

1.8.6 Crystal
· Cockburn and Highsmith suggested the crystal
family of agile methods.
· The primary goal of this method is to deliver useful
and working software.
· In this model, a set of methodologies are defined
which contains the core elements that are common
to all. These methodologies also contain roles,
process patterns, work products and practice that
are unique to each.
· Thus the crystal family is actually a set of agile
processes that are useful for different types of
projects. The agile team has to select the memebers
of the crustal family that is most approapriate for
their ongoing project and environment






Unit 2: Software Requirement Engineering

2.1 Software Engineering Practices and its
Importance
Definition : Software engineering practices includes -
concepts, principles, methods and tools that must be
considered for planning and development of software
system.
Importance :
1) By following software engineering practices,
every concerned entity gets involved in software
development process.
2) The software engineering practices - provide
detailed insight for software development
process.
3) It acknowledges the software engineer about the
principles that must be used during the software
development.
Essence of Software Engineering Practice :
· The problem solving activity is normally based on
following four steps -
1. Understanding of the problem (Communication
and requirement analysis).
2. Planning for possible solution (Modelling and
design).
3. Execute the plan (Code generation).
4. Check the accuracy of the solution (Testing and
quality assurance).

2.2 Core Principles 
· David Hooker proposed seven core principles for
software engineering practice. These are as follows 
Principle 1. Reason it all Exists : The software
system that you are going to develop must give
value to its users. If your development is not going
to add any value to its users then don't develop such
system.
Principle 2. Keep it Simple, Stupid (KISS) : The
software design must be simple, easy for
understanding and easy to maintain.
Principle 3. Maintain the Vision : There should be
clear vision for the software system to be built. The
clear vision about the system helps to develop it
without any ambiguity.
Principle 4. What you will Produce, others will
Consume : The software system that you develop
will be used by users, software designers,
programmers, testers and so on. So whenever you
develop the system, develop in such a way that your
job will be easier for them to handle.
Principle 5. Be Open to the Future : Develop a
system in such a way that it will have longer life
time. Develop the system in such a manner that it
will adapt any changes comfortably. Never design
the system for specific problems only, rather create it
for general purposes.
Principle 6. Plan ahead for Reuse : Reusability has
got vital importance in software industry. The
reusability can be achieved using the approaches like
object oriented programming. The software must be
developed and documented in such a way that
reusability can be easier one.
Principle 7. Think : Think about the system that you
are going to develop and acquire the required
knowledge. Thoughtfully, apply above six principles
during the software development process.

2.3 Communication Practices	
· Communication is carried out in order to
understand the customer requirements. Following
are the principles that are used to make the
communication effective -
Principle 1 - Listen : It is important to listen the
customer carefully. Ask for the clarifications
appropriately. Never interrupt him/her annoyingly
during the narration.
Principle 2 - Prepare for communication : Do some
research to understand the business domain. If you
are conducting the meeting, then prepare the agenda
before the meeting.
Principle 3 - Have facilitator for communication :
The facilitator or a leader is required for the
communication for three reasons. Firstly to move the
conversation in productive direction, secondly to
resolve any conflicts and thirdly to ensure that the
designated principles and standards are being
followed.
Principle 4 - Have face-to-face communication : The
face to face communication is important to have
effective communication.
Principle 5 - Take notes and document the
decisions : It is important to note down the
important points and decisions made during the
communication.
Principle 6 - Strive for collaborations : The collective
knowledge of the members of the team is combined
to understand the system. This makes a small
collaboration which help the team members in
deciding the goals of the software system being
developed.
Principle 7 - Stay focused : During the
communication and discussion, it is possible to
switch frequently from one topic to another. The
leader or facilitator of the communication must keep
the communication focused and must make every
topic modular. The modular discussion means leave
one topic only after resolving the issues within in it
and then only switch to another topic.
Principle 8 - Make pictorial representation : If
something is unclear, then make a drawing or sketch
of it for understanding.
Principle 9 - Move on : During the communication
just move on by resolving the issues and by
understanding the things.
Principle 10 - Negotiate : There are times when the
developers and customer need to negotiate on some
of the issues such as some functionalities, delivery
date, features priorities and so on.

2.4 Planning Practices 
· Planning is an activity that includes the set of
management and technical practices that software
has to follow in definite direction. Various
principles of planning are -
Principle 1 - Understand the scope of the project :
The scope of the project  help the software team what
is the goal of development
Principle 2 - Make the planning by involving the
customer : Customers specify what they exactly
want from the software system. The developer can
negotiate order of delivery, some unrealistic
functionalities, cost and so on. Hence customers
involvement in the project is must.
Principle 3 - Planning activity should be iterative :
Iterations help the developer to accommodate the
changes in the system plan.
Principle 4 - Make estimation based on the
knowledge : Estimation of the project represents the
efforts, cost and duration based on current
understanding of the work. But it is always vague.
Principle 5 - Consider risk while defining the plan :
The project plan must be flexible enough to
accommodate one or more risks.
Principle 6 - Be realistic : Software development can
not be 100 % perfect, there can be more or less
ambiguities and omissions, budgets and schedule
may vary, developers may make mistakes and so on.
Such things might occur during the planning of the
system.
Principle 7 - Adjust granularity according to plan :
Granularity means how much detailed is your project
plan. The fine granularity plan provides more work
plan details planed relatively short time increment.
On the other hand, the coarse granular plan provide
broader work task planed over long period. The plan
must be flexible enough for making the adjustments
about the granularity of the project.
Principle 8 - Ensure the quality : The plan must
help the software team to induce quality in their
development.
Principle 9 - Describe the accommodated changes :
The plan must help the software team to induce
required changes in their development.
Principle 10 - Track the plan frequently and make
the changes as per the requirements : The project
plan must be adjusted frequently.

2.5 Modeling Practices 
· Models are created for understanding the system.
During software development, there are two kinds
of models that are developed - analysis model and
design model.
(1) Analysis Modeling Principles
Following are analysis modeling principles -
1. The information domain of the problem must
be represented and understood : The
information domain represents the data that
flows in and out of the system. For designing the
analysis model it is necessary to understand this
data flow.
2. The functionality of the software must be
performed : There are various types off the
functionality that must be present in the system.
Some functions can be directly beneficial to the
user. Some functions are control functions, some
functions are for transforming the data and so
on.
3. The behavior of the software must be
represented by the model : By creating
appropriate model the behavior of the computer
system for the input submitted by the user,
interaction of the system with the external system
are represented by the software.
4. The model should be created in such a way that
it represents the details of the software in
layered or hierarchical manner : Software
systems are usually created to solve the complex
problems. The large and complex problems are
solved using divide and conquer strategy. These
sub-problems are relatively easy to understand.
This process of dividing the problems into
smaller sub-problems is called partitioning.
5. The analysis task must move from basic
information to the implementation of the
concept : Before creating the analysis model the
information gathered is from users' point of
view. This information should be transformed in
such a way that the implementation of the
concept using the computer based system.
(2) Design Modeling Principles
Following are design modeling principles -
1. Analysis model must be used to create design
model : The analysis model describes the
information domain, system behavior, user
visible functionalities and so on. The design
model translates this information into the system
architecture. Hence the elements of design model
should be traceable to analysis model.
2. Consider the architecture of the system to be
built : The skeleton of the system should be
prepared before creating the actual design of the
system. For creating such architecture the
information present in the analysis model is
used.
3. Design of data is an important activity : The
data design is an important element of the
architectural design. It represents the flow of
information.
4. Interfaces must be designed carefully : The
interfaces are important for communication of
two components and communication with the
external environment. Hence these need to be
designed carefully.
5. User interface designs must be as per the
needs : User interfaces basically assist the users
to interact with the system via user interfaces.
Hence the design of user interface must be by
considering the users needs.
6. Component level design must be functionally
independent : Functional independence is a
quality that indicates the single mindedness of
software component. Ideally every component
must focus on one functionality at a time. This is
called cohesiveness of the components. During
component level design high cohesiveness
(functionally independence) is required.
7. Components must be loosely coupled : If the
components are tightly coupled then error
propagation might get increased. The maintaining
such systems become difficult. This denotes low
coupling property of design.
8. Design representations must be easy to
understand : The software design is used to
generate the code. Hence it must be easy to
understand so that implementation of the system
can be effectively done.
9. Design development must be iterative : The
iterative development of the design model will
refine the work and errors can be corrected in
each iteration. But each after each iteration it
becomes difficult to keep the software design
simple.

2.6 Construction Practices 
· The construction practices are based on -
Preparation principles, coding principles and
validation principles.
(1) Preparation principles
These are some important principles that software
developers must follow before writing the code.
1. Firstly, understand the problem for which the
system is designed.
2. Know the basic design principles and concepts.
3. Choose appropriate programming language for
coding.
4. Select such a programming environment which is
convenient to work.
5. Prepare the set of unit tests for each component
of the code.
(2) Coding principles
These are some important principles that software
developers must follow while writing the code.
1. Adopt structured or modular programming
approach for the algorithm.
2. Choose the appropriate data structures
3. By understanding the system architecture, create
appropriate interfaces.
4. 5. Keep conditional logic very simple.
Create the nested loop in such a way that they
can be tested easily.
6. Give meaningful variable names.
7. Make the code documented by adding
appropriate comment statements within it.
8. Make use of indentation and blank lines in
between the code so that appropriate visual
layout of the code can be created.
(3) Validation principles
These are some important principles that software
developers must follow after completion of writing
the code.
1. Review the code thoroughly.
2. Perform unit tests and correct the errors.
3. Refactor the code.

2.7 Software Deployment 
 During deployment of the software component
three activities are carried out - i) Delivery
ii) Support and iii) Feedback.
· Following are the set of principles that must be
followed while delivering the software
increment/release to the customer.
1. Manage or fulfill the customer expectations :
Quiet often customers expect too much from the
delivered software product. To avoid this have a
clear communication with the customer about
the functionalities of the product.
2. The delivery package must be assembled and
well tested : Provide CD-ROM or other media
to the customer containing all the executables of
the software components.
3. The support service must be ready before
delivery of the software system : Assist the
user to handle the software system
appropriately. Moreover, if any problem or
query occurs then help the end-user to solve it.
4. Appropriate instructional material must be
given to the end user : Provide the user with
instruction manuals, help material, training aids,
demo and so on for handling the system
properly.
5. Do not deliver erroneous software : Never
provide the low quality or erroneous software
to the customers.

2.8 Requirement Gathering And Analysis 
· Requirement engineering is the process of
establishing the services that the customer requires
from a system. And the constraints under which it
operates and is developed.
Requirement Engineering Tasks
· Requirement engineering is the process
characterized for achieving following goals -
Understanding customer requirements and their
needs
Analyzing the feasibility of the requirement
Negotiating the reasonable solutions
Specification of an unambiguous solution.
Managing all the requirements of the project
Finally transforming the requirements into the
operational systems
· Requirement engineering process performs
following seven distinct functions - (Refer Fig. 2.8.1)
Let us now discuss these tasks in detail 

2.8.1 Inception 
Inception
· The inception means specifying the beginning of
the software project. Most of the software projects
get started due to business requirements. There may
be potential demand from the market for a
particular product and then the specific software
project needs to be developed.
· There exist several stakeholders who define the
business ideas. Stakeholders mean an entity that
takes active participation in project development. In
software project development, the stakeholders that
are responsible for defining the ideas are business
managers, marketing people, product managers and
so on. Their role is to do rough feasibility study
and to identify the scope of the project.
· During the inception a set of context free questions
is discussed. The purpose of inception is to -
1. Establish the basic understanding of the project.
2. Find out all possible solutions and to identify
the nature of the solution.
3. Establish an effective communication between
developer and the customer.

2.8.2 Elicitation
· Before the requirements can be analyzed and
modelled they must undergo through the process of
elicitation process. Requirements elicitation means
requirements discovery. Requirements elicitation is
very difficult task

2.8.3 Elaboration
· Elaboration is an activity in which the information
about the requirements is expanded and refined.
This information is gained during inception and
elicitation.
· The goal of elaboration activity is to prepare a
technical model of software functions, features and
constraints.

2.8.4 Negotiation
· Sometimes customer may demand for more than
that is achieved or there are certain situations in
which customer demands for something which
cannot be achieved in limited business resources.
To handle such situations requirement engineers
must convince the customers or end users by
solving various conflicts. For that purpose,
requirement engineers must ask the customers and
stakeholders to rank their requirements and then
priority of these requirements is decided. Using
iterative approach some requirements are
eliminated, combined or modified. This process
continues until the users' satisfaction is achieved.
2.8.5 Specification
· A specification can be a written document,
mathematical or graphical model, collection of use
case scenarios or may be the prototypes.
· There is a need to develop a standard specification
in which requirements are presented in consistent
and understandable manner.
· For a large system it is always better to develop the
specification using natural language and in a
written document form. The use of graphical
models is more useful for specifying the
requirements.
· Specification is the final work product of
requirement engineering process. It describes the
functions, constraints and performance of computer
based systems.
2.8.6 Validation
· Requirement Validation is an activity in which
requirement specification is analyzed in order to
ensure that the requirements are specified
unambiguously. If any inconsistencies, omissions
and errors are identified then those are corrected or
modified during the validation.
· The most commonly used requirement validation
mechanism is Formal Technical Review (FTR). In
FTR, the review team validates the software
requirements. The review team consists of
requirement engineers, customers, end users,
marketing person and so on. This review team
basically identifies conflicting requirements,
inconstancies or unrealistic requirements

2.8.7 Requirement Management
Definition : Requirements management is the process
of managing changing requirements during the
requirements engineering process and system
development.
Why requirements get change ?
· Requirements are always incomplete and
inconsistent. New requirements occur during the
process as business needs change and a better
understanding of the system is developed.
· System customers may specify the requirements
from business perspective that can conflict with end
user requirements.
· During the development of the system, its business
and the technical environment may get changed.

2.9 Types of Requirements
Functional and Non-Functional Requirements
· Software system requirements can be classified as
functional and non functional requirements.

2.9.1 · Purpose : Functional requirements should describe
all the required functionality or system services.
· The customer should provide statement of service.
It should be clear how the system should react to
particular inputs and how a particular system
should behave in particular situation.
· Functional requirements are heavily dependent
upon the type of software, expected users and the
type of system where the software is used.
· Functional user requirements may be high-level
statements of what the system should do but
functional system requirements should describe the
system services in detail.
· For example : Consider a library system in which
there is a single interface provided to multiple
databases. These databases are collection of articles
from different libraries. A user can search for,
download and print these articles for a personal
study.
· From this example we can obtain functional
requirements as,
1. The user shall be able to search either all of the
initial set of databases or select a subset from it.
2. The system shall provide appropriate viewers
for the user to read documents in the document
store.
3. A unique identifier (ORDER_ID) should be
allocated to every order. This identifier can be
copied by the user to the account's permanent
storage area.

2.9.1.1 Problems Associated with Requirements
· Requirements imprecision
1. Problems arise when requirements are not
precisely stated.
2. Ambiguous requirements may be interpreted in
different ways by developers and users.
3. Consider meaning of term 'appropriate viewers'
· User intention - Special purpose viewer for each
different document type;
· Developer interpretation - Provide a text viewer
that shows the contents of the document.
· Requirements completeness and consistency -
The requirements should be both complete and
consistent. Complete means they should include
descriptions of all facilities required. Consistent
means there should be no conflicts or
contradictions in the descriptions of the system
facilities.
Actually in practice, it is impossible to produce a
complete and consistent requirements document.

2.9.2 Non Functional Requirements
· Purpose : The non functional requirements define
system properties and constraints.
Various properties of a system can be : Reliability,
response time, storage requirements. And
constraints of the system can be : Input and output
device capability, system representations etc.
· Process requirements may also specify programming
language or development method.
· Non functional requirements are more critical than
functional requirements. If the non functional
requirements do not meet then the complete system
is of no use

2.9.2.1 Types of Non Functional Requirements
· The classification of non functional requirements is
as given in Fig. 2.9.1.
Product requirements
· These requirements specify how a delivered product
should behave in a particular way. For instance:
execution speed, reliability.
Organizational requirements
· The requirements which are consequences of
organizational policies and procedures come under
this category. For instance : Process standards used
implementation requirements.
External requirements
· These requirements arise due to the factors that are
external to the system and its development process.
For instance : Interoperability requirements,
legislative requirements.
Performance requirements
· These requirements specify the performance or
durability of its functioning. For instance : Response
to various events at particular instance.
· In short, non functional requirements arise through
i) User needs
ii) Because of budget constraints
iii) Organizational policies
iv) The need for interoperability with other
software or hardware systems
v) Because of external factors such as safety
regulations.
· Metrics used for specifying the non functional
requirements
Ex. 2.9.1 : Enlist various functional and non functional
requirements for the Bank ATM system.
Sol. : Functional requirements
1. There should be the facility for the customer to
insert a card.
2. 3. The system should first validate card and PIN.
The system should allow the customer to deposit
amount in the bank.
4. The system should dispense the cash on
withdrawal.
5. The system should provide the printout for the
transaction.
6. The system should make the record of the
transactions made by particular customer.
7. On invalid PIN entry for three times the card
should be retained by the system.
8. The cash withdrawal is allowed in multiple of
100.
9. The cash deposition is allowed in multiple of
100.
10. The customer is allowed to transfer amount
between the two accounts.
11. The customer is allowed to know the balance
enquiry.
12. The customer is allowed to get the printout for
desired transaction.
13. The system should be efficient.
Non functional requirements
1. Each of the transaction should be made within 60
seconds. If the time limit is exceeded, then cancel
the transaction automatically.
2. If there is no response from the bank computer
after request is made within the minutes then the
card is rejected with error message.
3. The bank dispenses money only after the
processing of withdrawal from the bank. That
means if sufficient fund is available in user's
account then only the withdrawal request is
processed.
4. Each bank should process the transactions from
several ATM centers at the same time.
5. The machine should be loaded with sufficient
fund in it.
2.9.2.2 Domain Requirements
· Domain requirements are derived from the
application domain of the system instead of specific
user needs.
· These requirements make use of domain
terminologies specific to the existing domain
concept.
· The domain requirements may be in the form of
new functional requirements, constraints on existing
functional requirement or guidance on how to carry
out certain computation.
· These are the specialised requirements and hence
software engineers find it difficult to co-relate the
domain requirements with the system requirements.
· It is important to specify the domain requirements
otherwise the system will not work properly.
· Example : Domain requirements for the library
system.
· There should be user interface for handling the
databases. These interfaces should be according to
some international standard.
· If there is copyright restriction on some document
then it should get printed locally on the server. The
copies of such document should not get created.

2.10 Eliciting Requirements
· Questioning is useful only at inception of the
project but for detailed requirement elicitation it is
not sufficient. During requirement elicitation certain
activities such as problem solving, elaboration,
negotiation and specification must be carried out.
Various ways by which the requirement elicitation
can be done are -
1. Collaborative requirement gathering
2. Quality function deployment
3. Use scenarios
4. Elicitation work product
Let us discuss these aspects of requirement
elicitation in detail -
2.10.1 Collaborative Requirements Gathering
· Collaborative requirement gathering is done using
collaborative, team-oriented approach.
· Facility Application Specification Technique (FAST)
is an approach in which joint team of customers
and developers work together to identify the
problem, propose elements of solution, negotiate
different approaches and prepare a specification for
preliminary set of solution requirements
Guideline for FAST approach -
1. A meeting should be conducted and attended by
both software engineers and customers. The place
of meeting should be a neutral site.
2. Rules for preparation and participation must be
prepared.
3. An agenda should be prepared in such a way
that it covers all the important point as well as it
allows all the new innovative ideas.
4. A facilitator controls the meeting. He could be
customer, developer or outsider.
5. A definition mechanism is used. The mechanism
can be work sheets, flip charts, wall stickers,
electronic bulletin board, chart room, virtual
forum.
6. The goal is to identify the problem, decide the
elements of solution, negotiate different
approaches and specify the preliminary set of
solution requirements.
· In FAST meeting each FAST attendee is asked to
prepare - a list of objects, list of services and a list
of constraints.
· The list of objects consists of all the objects used in
the system, the objects that are produced by the
system and the objects that surround the system.
· The list of services contain all the required
functionalities that manipulate or interact with the
objects.
· The list of constraints consists of all the constraints
of the system such as cost, rules, memory
requirement, speed accuracy etc.
· As the FAST meeting begins, the very first issue of
discussion is the need and justification for the new
product. Once everyone agrees upon the fact that
the product is justified, each participant has to
present his lists.
· These lists are then discussed, manipulated and
these modified or refined lists are combined by a
group.
· The combined list eliminates redundant entries adds
new ideas that come up during the discussion. The
combined list is refined in such a way that it helps
in building the system
· The combined list should be prepared in such a
way that a "consensus lists" can be prepared, for
object, services and constraints.
· A team is divided into subteams. Each subteam
develops a minispecification from each consensus
list.
· Finally a complete draft specification is developed.
For example -
· A FAST team is working on a commerical product.
A following product description is given as below -
"Nowadays the market for video game is
growing rapidly. We would like to enter this
market with more features, like attractive GUI,
multiple sound setting, realistic (3D) animations.
This product is tentatively called 'Gamefun'. At
the end of game, scores of each player should be
displayed".
The FAST attendee prepare following lists -
1) List of objects - Display, menu, a sound, an
event (moving from one level to another)
and so on.
2) List of services - Setting sounds, setting
colors in GUI, HELP, instructions for
players, score card etc.
List of constraints - Must be user friendly,
must have high speed, must accommodate
less size, should have less cost.
· The minispecification for Menu (object) can be as
given below -
Contains 'Start game' and 'exit' options.
List of all functional keys with corresponding
functionality.
Software provides interaction guidance, quick
tour, sound controls.
All players will play or interact through keys.
Software provides facility for change in the look
of GUI.
Software displays scores of each player

2.10.2 Quality Function Deployment
· Quality function deployment is a quality
management technique which translates the
customer needs and wants into technical
requirements. This technique was introduced in
Japan.
· Under quality function deployment three types of
requirements can be defined 
Normal requirements
· The requirements as per goals and objectives of the
system are called normal requirements. These
requirements can be easily identified during the
meeting with the customer.
· For example : Handling mouse and keyboard
events for any GUI based system.
Expected requirements
· These types of requirements are such requirements
which system must be having even if customer did
not mention about them. These are such
requirements that if they are not present then the
system will be meaningless.
· For example : A software package for presentation
(like Microsoft Power Point) must have option of
'new slide insert', so that user will be able to insert
a new slide at any position during his presentation.
Exciting requirements :
· When certain requirements are satisfied by the
software beyond customer's expectations then such
requirements are called exciting requirements.
· For example : Spell check facility in Microsoft Word
is an exciting requirement. Various types of
deployments that can be conducted during software
development process are -
· Function deployment : For determining the value of
each function this deployment can be done.
· Information deployment : After identifying various
functionalities events and data objects must be
identified.
· Task deployment : The task associated with each
function must be identified.
Value analysis : Identify the priorities of
requirements. The technique of QFD requires proper
interaction with customer.

2.10.3 Usage Scenarios
· During requirement gathering overall vision for
systems functions and features get developed.
· In order to understand how these functions and
features are used by different classes of end users,
developers and users create a set of scenarios. This
set identifies the usefulness of the system to be
constructed. This set is normally called as use-cases.
· The use-cases provide a description of how the
system will be used.

2.10.4 Elicitation Work Product
Following are some work products that get produced
during requirement elicitation -
· A statement of feasibility study performed in order
to find the need of the project.
· Statement for the scope of the system.
· A list of various stakeholders such as customer,
end-users, technical persons, and many others who
participate during requirement elicitation.
· A technical description of system environment
· A list of requirements and constraints.
· A set of usage scenarios along with operating
conditions.
· The prototype that may get developed for defining
the requirements in better manner.
These work products are then reviewed by all the
people who participate in requirement elicitation

2.11 Developing Use Cases 
Ex. 2.11.1 : Draw a use case diagram for a Bank
Management System (Refer Fig. 2.11.1)

2.12 Building Requirement Models
· Requirement analysis is an intermediate phase between system engineering and software design.
· Requirement analysis produces a software
specification.
How is requirement analysis helpful ?
· Analyst - The requirement analysis helps the
'analyst' to refine software allocation. Using
requirement analysis various models such as
data model, functional model and behavioral
model can be defined.
· Designer - After requirement analysis, the
designer can design for data, architectural
interface and component level designs.
· Developer - Using requirements specification
and design the software can be developed.
What are requirement analysis efforts ?
1. Problem recognition
· The requirement analysis is done for understanding the need of the system. The scope of the software
in context of a system must be understood
2. Evaluation and synthesis
· Following are the tasks that must be done in
evaluation and synthesis phase.
i) Define all externally observable data objects
evaluate data flow.
ii) Define software functions.
iii) Understand the behaviour of the system.
iv) Establish system interface characteristics.
v) Uncover the design constraints.
3. Modelling
· After evaluation and synthesis, using data,
functional and behavioral domains the data model,
functional model and behavioral model can be built.
4. Specification
· The requirement specification (SRS) must be built.
5. Review
· The SRS must be reviewed by project manager and
must be refined. (Refer Fig. 2.12.1)

2.12.1 Overall Objectives
· Following are three objectives of analysis model -
1. Describe customer requirement.
2. Create a basis for software design.
3. Prepare valid requirements list.
· Analysis model bridges the gap between system
description and design model. The system
description describes overall system functionality
and design model describes the software
architecture, user interface and component level
structure.
· There is no clear division of analysis and design
tasks. Some design can be carried out during
analysis and some analysis might be conducted
during the design of the software

2.13 Definition of Software Requirement
Specification (SRS)
· Software Requirements Specification (SRS) is a kind
of document which includes both definition and
specification of requirements.

2.14 Need for SRS
· Following are some advantages of SRS which
clearly specify the need for SRS.
1. SRS establishes an agreement between the client
and supplier about the nature of software
product.
2. SRS can be used for validating the final product
because the software requirements are specified
in SRS. And whether the final product meets
these requirements or not - this can be tested
using SRS.
3. For producing high quality software high
quality SRS must be produced. Hence it is said
that high quality SRS is a prerequisite for high
quality software.
4. High quality SRS reduces the cost of software
development.

2.15 Format 
· Tracking the team's progress throughout the
development activity.
· Typically software designers use IEEE STD 830-1998
as the basis for the entire Software Specifications.
The standard template for writing SRS is as given
below.
Document Title
Author(s)
Affiliation
Address
Date
Document Version
1. Introduction
1.1 Purpose of this document : Describes the
purpose of the document.
1.2 Scope of this document : Describes the scope of
this requirements definition effort. This section
also details any constraints that were placed
upon the requirements elicitation process, such as
schedules, costs.
1.3 Overview : Provides a brief overview of the
product defined as a result of the requirements
elicitation process.
2. General Description
· Describes the general functionality of the product
such as similar system information, user
characteristics, user objective, general constraints
placed on design team.
· Describes the features of the user community,
including their expected expertise with software
systems and the application domain.
3. Functional Requirements : This section lists the
functional requirements in ranked order. A functional
requirement describes the possible effects of a
software system, in other words, what the system
must accomplish. Each functional requirement should
be specified in following manner -
1. Description : A full description of the
requirement.
2. Criticality : Describes how essential this
requirement is to the overall system.
3. Technical issues : Describes any design or
implementation issues involved in satisfying this
requirement.
4. Cost and schedule : Describes the relative or
absolute costs of the system.
5. Risks : Describes the circumstances under which
this requirement might not able to be satisfied.
6. Dependencies with other requirements :
Describes interactions with other requirements.
7. Any other appropriate.
4. Interface Requirements : This section describes
how the software interfaces with other software
products or users for input or output. Examples of
such interfaces include library routines, token
streams, shared memory, data streams and so forth.
4.1 User Interfaces : Describes how this product
interfaces with the user.
4.1.1 GUI : Describes the graphical user
interface if present. This section should
include a set of screen dumps to illustrate
user interface features.
4.1.2 CLI : Describes the command-line interface
if present. For each command, a
description of all arguments and example
values and invocations should be provided.
4.1.3 API : Describes the application
programming interface, if present.
4.2 Hardware Interfaces : Describes interfaces to
hardware devices.
4.3 Communications Interfaces : Describes network
interfaces.
4.4 Software Interfaces : Describes any remaining
software interfaces not included above.
5. Performance Requirements : Specifies speed and
memory requirements.
6. Design Constraints : Specifies any constraints for
the design team such as software or hardware
limitations.
7. Other Non Functional Attributes : Specifies any
other particular non functional attributes required by
the system. Such as :
7.1 Security
7.2 Binary Compatibility
7.3 Reliability
7.4 Maintainability
7.5 Portability
7.6 Extensibility
7.7 Reusability
7.8 Application Compatibility
7.9 Resource Utilization
7.10 Serviceability
... others as appropriate.
8. Operational Scenarios : This section should
describe a set of scenarios that illustrate, from the
user's perspective, what will be experienced when
utilizing the system under various situations.
9. Preliminary Schedule : This section provides an
initial version of the project plan, including the major
tasks to be accomplished, their interdependencies,
and their tentative start/stop dates.
10. Preliminary Budget : This section provides an
initial budget for the project.
11. Appendices
11.1 Definitions, Acronyms, Abbreviations :
Provides definitions terms and acronyms, can
be provided.
11.2 References : Provides complete citations to all
documents and meetings referenced

2.16 Characteristics 
· Following are some characteristics of a good SRS -
1. Correct : The SRS must be correct. That means
all the requirements must be correctly
mentioned, or the requirements must be realistic
by nature. For instance : While developing a
word processing software, if there is a
requirement for spell check facility and if
software cannot find the spelling errors from the
document, then that means requirement is
incorrect.
2. Complete : To make the SRS complete, it should
specify the purpose of SRS.
3. Unambiguous : When requirements are
understood correctly then only unambiguous
SRS can be written. Unambiguous specification
means only one interpretation can be made
from the specified requirements. If for particular
term there are multiple meanings then, those
terms should be mentioned in glossary with
proper meaning.
4. Consistent : If there are not conflicts in the
specified requirements then SRS is said to be
consistent
5. Stability : In SRS, it is not possible to specify all
the requirements. The SRS must contain all the
essential requirements. Each requirement must
be clear and explicit.
6. Verifiable : The SRS should be written in such
a manner that the requirements that are
specified within it must be satisfied by the
software. For instance - "The GUI should look
good". This requirement is not verifiable because
one cannot specifically define "what is mean by
good ?".
7. Modifiable : Writing SRS is an iterative process.
Even after specifying the requirements they can
be modified later on if there is a change in user
requirements. While modifying the SRS it is
important to preserve the completeness and
consistency in requirements.
8. Traceable : If origin of requirement is properly
given or references of the requirements are
correctly mentioned then such a requirement is
called as traceable requirement.




Unit 3: Software Modeling And Design

3.1 Translating Requirement Model into
Design Model
· Software design is at the core of software
engineering and it is applied irrespective of any
process model.
· After analysing and modelling the requirements,
software design is done which serves as the basis
for code generation and testing.
· Software designing is a process of translating
analysis model into the design model.
· The analysis model is manifested by scenario based,
class based, flow oriented and behavioural elements
and feed the design task.
· The classes and relationships defined by CRC index
cards and other useful class based elements provide
the basis for the data or class design.
· The architectural design defines the relationship
between major structural elements of the software.
The architectural styles and design patterns can be
used to achieve the requirements defined for the
system.
· The interface design describes how software
communicates with systems. These systems are
interacting with each other as well as with the
humans who operate them. Thus interface design
represents the flow of information and specific type
of behaviour. The usage scenarios and behavioural
models of analysis modelling provide the
information needed by the interface design.
· The component-level design transforms structural
elements of software architecture into procedural
description of software module. The information
used by the component design is obtained from
class based model, flow based model and
behavioural model.
· Software design is important to assess the quality
of software. Because design is the only way that we
can accurately translate the user requirements into
the finished software product.
· Without design unstable system may get developed.
Even if some small changes are made then those
changes will go fail. It will become difficult to test
the product. The quality of the software product can
not be assessed until late in the software process (Refer Fig. 3.1.1)

3.1.1 Data Modeling 
· Data modelling is the basic step in the analysis
modelling. In data modelling the data objects are
examined independently of processing.
· The data domain is focused. And a model is created
at the customer’s level of abstraction.
· The data model represents how data objects are
related with one another.

3.1.1.1 Data Object, Attributes and Relationships
What is data object ?
· Data object is a set of attributes (data items) that
will be manipulated within the software (system).
· Each instance of data object can be identified with
the help of unique identifier. For example : A
student can be identified by using his roll number.
· The system cannot perform without accessing to the
instances of object.
· Each data object is described by the attributes which
themselves are data items.
Data object is a collection of attributes that act as an
aspect, characteristic, quality or descriptor of the object.
The vehicle is a data object which can be defined or
viewed with the help of set of attributes.
Typical data objects are
· External entities such as printer, user, speakers.
· Things such as reports, displays, signals.
· Occurrences or events such as interrupts, alarm,
telephone call.
· Roles such as manager, engineer, customer.
· Organizational units such as division, departments.
· Places such as manufacturing floor, workshops.
· Structures such as student records, accounts, file.
What are attributes ?
Attributes define properties of data object
Typically there are three types of attributes -
1. Naming attributes - These attributes are used to
name an instance of data object. For example : In
a vehicle data object make and model are naming
attributes.
2. Descriptive attributes - These attributes are used
to describe the characteristics or features of the
data object. For example : In a vehicle data object
color is a descriptive attribute.
3. Referential attribute - These are the attributes
that are used in making the reference to another
instance in another table. For example : In a
vehicle data object owner is a referential attribute.
What is relationship ?
Relationship represents the connection between the
data objects. For example
The relationship between a shopkeeper and a toy is
as shown below
Here the toy and shopkeeper are two objects that
share following relationships -
· Shopkeeper orders toys.· Shopkeeper sells toys.
· Shopkeeper shows toys.· Shopkeeper stocks toys (Refer Fig. 3.1.2)

3.1.2 Cardinality and Modality
Cardinality in data modeling, cardinality specifies how
the number of occurrences of one object is related to the
number of occurrences of another object.
· One to one (1 : 1) - One object can relate to only
one other object.
· One to many (1 : N) - One object can relate to
many objects.
· Many to many (M : N) - Some number of
occurrences of an object can relate to some other
number of occurrences of another object.
Modality indicates whether or not a particular data
object must participate in the relationship.
Modality of a relationship is 0 (zero) if there is no
explicit need for the relationship to occur or the
relationship is optional. The modality is 1 (one) if an
occurrence of the relationship is mandatory.
Example : Refer Fig. 3.1.3.

3.2 Analysis Modeling 
Requirement anslysis produces a software
specification.
The requirement analysis helps the 'analyst' to refine
software allocation. Using requirement analysis
various models such as data model, functional model
and behavioral model can be defined.
· Following are three objectives of analysis model -
1. Describe customer requirement.
2. Create a basis for software design.
3. Prepare valid requirements list.
· Analysis model bridges the gap between system
description and design model. The system
description describes overall system functionality
and design model describes the software
architecture, user interface and component level
structure.
· There is no clear division of analysis and design
tasks. Some design can be carried out during
analysis and some analysis might be conducted
during the design of the software

3.2.1 Elements of Analysis Model
But the commonly used analysis model combines
features of both these approaches because the best
suitable analysis model bridges the software
requirements and software design
Following are the elements of analysis model -
· Scenario based elements
· Flow-oriented elements
· Behavioural elements
· Class based elements
Following Fig. 3.2.1 illustrates the elements of
analysis model.

3.3 Design Modeling
Software design is model of software which translates
the requirements into finished software product in
which the details about software data structures,
architecture, interfaces and components that are
necessary to implement the system are given.
Characteristics of Good Design
1. The good design should implement all the
requirements that are explicitly mentioned in the
analysis model. It should accommodate all the
implicit requirements demanded by the customer.
2. The design should be simple enough so that the
code developer, code tester as well as those who
are supporting the software will find it readable
and understandable.
3. The design should be comprehensive. That
means it should provide a complete picture of
software, addressing the data, functional and
behavioural domains from an implementation
perspective.

3.3.1 Fundamental Design Concepts
The software design concept provides a framework
for implementing the right software.
Various issues that must be considered during
software design are -
(1) Abstraction
The abstraction means an ability to cope up with the
complexity. Software design occurs at different levels
of abstraction. At each stage of software design
process levels of abstractions should be applied to
refine the software solution. At the higher level of
abstraction, the solution should be stated in broad
terms and in the lower level more detailed
description of the solution is given.
(2) Modularity
· The software is divided into separately named
and addressable components that called as
modules.
· Monolithic software is hard to grasp for the
software engineer, hence it has now become a
trend to divide the software into number of
products. But there is a co-relation between the
number of modules and overall cost of the
software product.
(3) Architecture
· Architecture means representation of overall
structure of an integrated system
· In architecture various components interact and
the data of the structure is used by various
components.
(4) Refinement
· Refinement is actually a process of elaboration.
· Stepwise refinement is a top-down design strategy
proposed by Niklaus WIRTH.
· The architecture of a program is developed by
successively refining levels of procedural detail.
· The process of program refinement is analogous
to the process of refinement and partitioning that
is used during requirements analysis.
· Abstraction and refinement are complementary
concepts. The major difference is that - In the
abstraction low-level details are suppressed.
Refinement helps the designer to elaborate
low-level details.
(5) Pattern
According to Brad Appleton the design pattern can
be defined as - It is a named nugget (something
valuable) of insight which conveys the essence of
proven solution to a recurring problem within a
certain context.
In other words, design pattern acts as a design
solution for a particular problem occurring in specific
domain. Using design pattern designer can determine
whether-
· Pattern can be reusable
· Pattern can be used for current work.
· Pattern can be used to solve similar kind of
problem with different functionality.
(6) Information Hiding
Information hiding is one of the important property
of effective modular design. The term information
hiding means the modules are designed in such a
way that information contained in one module cannot
be accessible to the other module (the module which
does not require this information). Due to information
hiding only limited amount of information can be
passed to other module or to any local data structure
used by other module.
The advantage of information hiding is basically in
testing and maintenance. Due to information hiding
some data and procedures of one module can be
hidden from another module. This ultimately avoids
introduction of errors module from one module to
another. Similarly one can make changes in the
desired module without affecting the other module.
(7) Functional Independence
· The functional independence can be achieved by
developing the functional modules with
single-minded approach.
· By using functional independence functions may
be compartmentalized and interfaces are
simplified.
· Independent modules are easier to maintain with
reduced error propagation.
· The major benefit of functional independence is in
achieving effective modularity.
· The functional independence is assessed using two
qualitative criteria - Cohesion and coupling.
· Cohesion : A cohesive module performs only "one
task" in software procedure with little interaction
with other modules. In other words cohesive
module performs only one thing.
· Coupling : Coupling effectively represents how
the modules can be "connected" with other
module or with the outside world.Coupling is a
measure of interconnection among modules in a
program structure.
(8) Refactoring
· It is defined refactoring as "The process of
changing a software system in such a way that
the external behaviour of the design do not get
changed, however the internal structure gets
improved".
· Benefits of refactoring are -
1. The redundancy can be achieved.
2. Inefficient algorithms can be eliminated or can be replaced by efficient one.
3. Poorly constructed or inaccurate data structures can be removed or replaced.
4. Other design failures can be rectified

3.4 Design Notations 
3.4.1 Data Flow Diagrams 
· Behavioral models are used to describe the overall behavior of a system. There are two types of
models that depict the behavior of the system
· The data flow model represents the flow of data and state chart diagram represent the states that are
occurring in the system.
Data flow model
· These models can be used separately on together depending upon nature
of application.
· Let us discuss these models in detail

3.4.1.1 Data Flow Diagram
· The data flow diagrams depict the information flow and the transforms that are applied on the data
as it moves from input to output.
· The symbols that are used in data flow diagrams are -
· The data flow diagrams are used to represent the system at any level of abstraction.
· The DFD can be partitioned into levels that represent increase in information flow and detailed
functionality.
· A level 0 DFD is called as ‘fundamental system model’
or ‘context model’. In the context model the entire
software system is represented by a bubble with input
Process
and output indicated by incoming and outgoing
arrows.
· Each process shown in level 1 represents the sub
functions of overall system.
Data store
· The number of levels in DFD can be increased until
every process represents the basic functionality.
· As the number of levels gets increased in the DFD,
Flow of data (may be input
data of output data)
each bubble gets refined. The following figure shows
the leveling in DFD. Note that the information flow
continuity must be maintained.
Designing Data Flow Diagrams
· The data flow diagrams are used to model the information and function domain. Refinement of DFD
into greater levels helps the analyst to perform functional decomposition.
· The guideline for creating a DFD is as given in Fig. 3.4.1.
1. Level 0 DFD i.e. Context level DFD should depict the system as a single bubble.
2. Primary input and primary output should be carefully identified.
3. While doing the refinement isolate processes, data objects and data stores to represent the next level.
4. All the bubbles (processes) and arrows should be appropriately named.
5. One bubble at a time should be refined.
6. Information flow continuity must be maintained from level to level.
· A simple and effective approach to expand the level 0 DFD to level 1 is to perform “grammatical
parse” on the problem description. Identify nouns and verbs from it. Typically nouns represent the
external entities, data objects or data stores and verbs represent the processes. Although grammatical
parsing is not a foolproof but we can gather much useful information to create the data flow
diagrams.
Rules for designing DFD
1. No process can have only outputs or only inputs. The process must have both outputs and inputs.(Refer Fig. 3.4.2)

2. The verb phrases in the problem description can be identified as processes in the system. (Refer Fig. 3.4.3)

3.There should not be a direct flow between data stores and external entity. This flow should go
through a process.
4. Data store labels should be noun phrases from problem description.
5. No data should move directly between external entities. The data flow should go through a
process.
6. 7. Generally source and sink labels are noun phrases.
Interactions between external entities is outside scope of the system and therefore not represented
in DFD.
8. 9. Data flow from process to a data store is for updation/insertion/deletion.
Data flow from data store to process is for retrieving or using the information.
10. Data flow labels are noun phrases from problem description
(Refer Fig. 3.4.4 and Fig. 3.4.5)

Ex. 3.4.6 : Draw Level 0 and Level 1 DFD for ATM system.
Sol.: The level 0 DFD is the context level DFD in which only inputs and outputs that are interacting with the
system are given. (Refer Fig. 3.4.14 and Fig. 3.4.15)


3.4.2 Structured Flow Chart
· The structure chart is a principle tool of structured design.
· The basic element in the structured chart is module. Module is defined as a collection of program
statement with four attributes.
· Input and output : What the module gets from the invoker is called input and what the receiver gets
from the module is called output.
· Function : The function processes the input and
produces the output.
· Mechanics : The code or the logic by which the
function is carried out.
· Internal data : It is the own workspace.
· The two modules can be connected to each other
by a connector as shown below.(Refer Fig. 3.4.16)
· The module uses data and flags. The data is processed by different modules. The flag is used as a
control signal. It can be set or reset.
· For example if we have two modules one for getting the employee detail(subordinate) and another
module is for finding the employee name(superordinate). Then the caller module will sent the data as
employee's ID and using that ID the called module will find the name of employee. If the employee
ID is valid then that message will be given by the called module to a caller module. The use of data
and flag can be as shown below.(Refer Fig. 3.4.17)
· The iterations and decisions on a structured chart is as shown below
(Refer Fig. 3.4.18)
· The example of a structure chart is as given below.
(Refer Fig. 3.4.19)

3.4.3 Decision Tables
Many software applications possess certain modules in which certain complex conditions occur and
such conditions should be responded by taking appropriate actions. Hence decision tables are used in
which complex conditions and corresponding actions are stored in a tabular form. Such decision table
can be used by software program to model the complicated logic. And therefore it is almost impossible
to mis-interpret the decision table.
The decision table is divided into four sections as given below.
Rules
Conditions Condition alternatives
Actions Action entries
The decision tables can associate many independent conditions with several actions in an elegant way.
The rules can be shown by numbering them.
For example : we can create a decision table for following scenario
“ A nationalised bank gives housing loan to his customers with fixed and floating rate of interset. If
the customer chooses the fixed rate of interest and takes a loan of an amount which is less than one
lakhs then apply scheme A structure to him and if the customer chooses floating rate for a loan
amount less than 1 lakhs then apply scheme B structure to him and at the same time apply monthly
charges to him.If the cutomer chooses
floating rate with loan amount > 1 lakhs
then apply monthly charges and give him
other scheme”.
In above given decision table T indicates condition is
true and F indicates condition is false. Thus decision
table is useful for representing the conditions and
corresponding actions

3.5 Testing 
3.5.1 Meaning and Purpose
Definition : Software testing is an activity performed
to uncover errors. It is a critical element of software
quality assurance and represents the ultimate review
of specification, design and coding.
The purpose of software testing is to ensure whether
the software functions appear to be working
according to specifications and performance
requirements.
Goals of Testing
The testing goals are,
1. 2. 3. Testing is a process of executing a program with
the intend of finding an error.
A good test case is one that has high probability
of finding an undiscovered error.
A successful test is one that uncovers an as-yet
undiscovered error.
The major testing objective is to design tests that
systematically uncover types of errors with minimum
time and effort.
Testing Principles
Every software engineer must apply following testing
principles while performing the software testing.
1. All tests should be traceable to customer
requirements.
2. Tests should be planned long before testing
begins.
3. The Pareto principle can be applied to software
testing - 80 % of all errors uncovered during
testing will likely be traceable to 20 % of all
program modules.
4. Testing should begin "in the small" and progress
toward testing "in the large".
5. 6. Exhaustive testing is not possible.
To be most effective, testing should be conducted
by an independent third party.
3.5.2 Black Box and White Box Testing
Black Box Testing
· The black box testing is also called as behavioural
testing.
· Black box testing methods focus on the functional
requirements of the software. Test sets are derived
that fully exercise all functional requirements.
· The black box testing is not an alternative to white
box testing and it uncovers different class of errors
than white box testing.
· Objective : Black box testing uncovers following
types of errors.
1. Incorrect or missing functions
2. Interface errors 3. Errors in data structures
4. Performance errors
5. Initialization or termination errors
White Box Testing
· In white box testing the procedural details are
closely examined.
· In this testing the internals of software are tested to
make sure that they operate according to
specifications and designs.
· Objective : The major focus of white box testing is
on internal structures, logic paths, control flows,
data flows, internal data structures, conditions,
loops, etc.
Advantages and disadvantages of black box
testing
Advantages :
1. The black box testing focuses on fundamental
aspect of system without being concerned for
internal logical structure of the software.
2. The advantage of conducting black box testing is
to uncover following types of errors.
i. Incorrect or missing functions
ii. Interface errors
iii. Errors in external data structures
iv. Performance errors
v. Initialization or termination errors
Disadvantages :
1. All the independent paths within a module
cannot be tested.
2. Logical decisions along with their true and false
sides cannot be tested.
3. 4. All the loops and the boundaries of these loops
cannot be exercised with black box testing.
Internal data structure cannot be validated.
Advantages and disadvantages of white box testing
Advantages :
1. Each procedure can be tested thoroughly. The
internal structures, data flows, logical paths,
conditions and loops can be tested in detail.
2. It helps in optimizing the code.
3. White box testing can be easily automated.
4. Due to knowledge of internal coding structure it
is easy to find out which type of input data can
help in testing the application efficiently.
Disadvantages :
1. The knowledge of internal structure and coding
is desired for the tested. Thus the skilled tester is
required for whitebox testing. Due to this the
testing cost is increased.
2. Sometimes it is difficult to test each and every
path of the software and hence many paths may
go untested.
3. 4. Maintaining the white box testing is very difficult
because it may use specialized tools like code
analyzer and debugging tools are required.
The missing functionality can not be identified.
3.5.3 Level of Testing
We begin by ‘testing-in-the-small’ and move toward
‘testing-in-the-large’.
Various testing strategies for conventional software
are
1. Unit testing 2. Integration testing
3. Validation testing 4. System testing
Unit testing - In this type of testing techniques
are applied to detect the errors from each
software component individually.
2. Integration testing - It focuses on issues
associated with verification and program
construction as components begin interacting
with one another.
3. Validation testing - It provides assurance that
the software validation criteria (established
during requirements analysis) meets all
functional, behavioural and performance
requirements.
4. System testing - In system testing all system
elements forming the system is tested as a whole.(Refer Fig. 3.5.1)

3.5.3.1 Unit Testing
· In unit testing the individual components are tested
independently to ensure their quality.
· The focus is to uncover the errors in design and
implementation.
· The various tests that are conducted during the unit
test are described as below.
1. Module interfaces are tested for proper
information flow in and out of the program.
Local data are examined to ensure that integrity
is maintained.
Boundary conditions are tested to ensure that the
module operates properly at boundaries
established to limit or restrict processing.
4. All the basis (independent) paths are tested for
ensuring that all statements in the module have
been executed only once.
All error handling paths should be tested.
Drivers and stub software need to be developed
to test incomplete software. The “driver” is a
program that accepts the test data and prints the
relevant results. And the “stub” is a subprogram
that uses the module interfaces and performs the (Refer Fig. 3.5.2)
minimal data manipulation if required. This is illustrated by following Fig. 3.5.3.
7. The unit testing is simplified when a component with high cohesion (with one function) is designed. In such
a design the number of test cases are less and one can easily predict or uncover errors.

3.5.4 Test Documentation 
3.5.4.1 Test Case Template
· Test cases are used to determine the presence of fault in the program. Sometimes even if there is
some fault in our program the correct output can be obtained for some inputs. Hence it is necessary
to exercise those set of inputs for which faults (if any) can be exposed off.
· Executing test cases require money because - i) machine time is required to execute test cases ii)
human efforts are involved in executing test cases. Hence in the project testing minimum number of
test cases should be there as far as possible.
· The testing activity should involve two goals -
i) Maximize the number of errors detected.
ii) Minimize the number of test cases.
· The selection of test case should be such that faulty
module or program segment must be exercised by
at least one test case.
· Selection of test cases is determined by some criteria
which is called as test selection criterion. Hence the
test selection criterion T can be defined as the set of
conditions that must be satisfied by the set of test
cases.
· Testing criterion are based on two fundamental
properties - reliability and validity.
· A test criterion is reliable if all the test cases detect
same set of errors.
· A test criterion is valid if for any error in the
program there is some set which causes error in the
program.
· For testing criteria there is an important theorem -
"if testing criterion is valid and reliable if a set
satisfying testing criterion succeeds then that means
program contains no errors".
· Generating test cases to satisfy criteria is complex
task.
· The test case specification records the results of the
testing, the conditions used for testing particular
unit. It also specifies the expected test results. It
records the outcome of test cases (Pass/Fail). The
sample structure of a test case specification is as
given below -
· Test case specification is the major activity in the
testing process. Careful selection of test cases will
help in conducting proper testing.
There are two basic reasons why test case
specification should be before using them for testing -
Firstly it will assist the tester to reveal as many errors
as possible from the program and secondly the high
quality code can be produced.

3.5.4.2 Test Plan
Test plan is not a static document. It gets generated
during the development. The main purpose of test
planning is to describe the product tests and to
establish the standards in testing process. The
structure of test plan is as given below.
1. Testing process
In this section various phases of testing process are
described.
2. Requirements traceability
Testing should be planned to meet all the
requirements.
3. Tested items
The tested products of software are tested.
4. Testing schedule
It includes testing schedule and resource allocation
for this schedule.
5. Test recording procedures
After running the tests, it is necessary to record those
tests in order to check whether tests are conducted
systematically or not.
6. Hardware and software requirements
The required software tools and hardware utilization
is specified under this section.
7. Constraints
All the factors affecting the testing process are listed
under this section.

3.5.4.3 Introduction to Defect Report
Defect report is a document that identifies and
describes the defects detected by the tester.
Specify the status of the defect.
The purpose of defect report is to state the problem
as clearly as possible so that the developer can fix it
easily.
In most of the software companies defect report is
used as a tool in defect management process.
The template of commonly used defect report is as
follows -

3.5.4.4 Test Summary Report
· Test summary report is a document which contains
summary of test activities and final test results.
· After completion of testing cycle, it is very
important to communicate the test results and
findings to project stakeholders(Stakeholders are
people who take part in developing the software
product) so that decisions can be made for the
software release.
Template : The IEEE template for Test Summary
Report is as given below -
Test Summary Report Identifier
[Enter Some type of unique company generated number to
identify this summary report, its level and the level of
software that it is related to.]
Summary
[Include basic information about what was tested and what happened.]

Project Name : [Project name]
· System Name : [System name]
· Version Number : [Version number]
· Test Item : [This should match the item definitions
from the appropriate level test plan that this report
is covering. Any variance from the items specified
in the test plan should be identified.]
· Additional Comments : [Enter any additional
comments]
Variances
Document any changes from those areas agreed on in
the reference documents, especially in areas that may
cause concern to the group accepting the test results.
Support materials and documents for-
®
1) Change requests
2) Enhancement requests
3) Incident reports
Comprehensive assessment
[Enter a comprehensive assessment of your interpretation
of how adequate the test was in light of how thorough the
test plan said it should be ? What wasn't tested well
enough ?]
Summary of resultss
[Summarize the test results. Include a detailed
description of any deviations from the original test
plan, design, test case, or expected results. Include
any issues or bugs discovered during the test.]
Evaluation
· Based on evaluation of testing, each identified test
item should be covered in the evaluation.
· Evaluate exist criteria mentioned in the test plan.
· Evaluate final defect status
· Identify and evaluate product risk, quality of test
object, and testing process.
Summary of activities
Cover the planned activities and the changes to those
plans especially in areas where the amount of actual
effort greatly exceeded the planned effort. Include the
reasons for the variances and the possible impact on
the testing staff.
[Include
· Staff time used in Hours per day/week
· Elapsed time versus staff time
· Is staff working excess hours per week
· Costs - planned versus actual
· Variances and the reasons for the change such as -
change in project scope, requirements changes,
newly introduced defects, and so on.]
Approvals
The undersigned acknowledge they have reviewed
the <Project Name> Test Summary Report and agree
with the approach it presents. Changes to this Test
Summary Report will be coordinated with and
approved by the undersigned or their designated
representatives.
[List the individuals whose signatures are desired.
Examples of such individuals are Quality Manager or
Tester. Add additional lines for signature as necessary.
Although signatures are desired, they are not always
required to move forward with the practices outlined
within this document.]
Signature: Date: ____________
Print Name: _________________
Title: _______________________
Role: ________________________





Unit 4: Software Project Estimation

4.1 Management Spectrum 
Effective software project management focuses four
P’s i.e. people, product, process and project. The
successful project management is done with the help
of these four factors where the order of these
elements is not arbitrary. Project manager has to
motivate the communication between stakeholders.
He should also prepare a project plan for the success
of the product.

4.1.1 The People
People factor is an important issue in software
industry. There is a strong need for motivated and
highly skilled people for developing the software
product. The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has
developed the People Management Capability
Maturity Model (PM-CMM)
By using PM-CMM model software organizations
become capable for undertaking complex applications
which ultimately attracts or motivates the talented
people.
Following are some key practice areas for software
people -
· Recruitment
· Selection
· Performance management
· Training compensation
· Career development
· Organization and work design
· Culture development.

4.1.2 The Product
· Before planning the project three important tasks
need to be done -
(1) Product objectives and scope must be
established.
(2) Alternative solutions should be considered.
(3) Technical and management constraints must
be identified.
· The software developer and customer must
communicate with each other in order to define the
objectives and scope of the product.
· This is done as the first step in requirement
gathering and analysis.
· The scope of the project identifies primary data,
functions and behaviour of the product.
· After establishing the objectives and scope of the
product the alternative solutions are considered.
· Finally, the constraints imposed by - delivery
deadline or budgetary restrictions, personal
availability can be identified.

4.1.3 The Process
· The software process provides the framework from
which the software development plan can be
established.
· There are various framework activities that needs to
be carried out during the software development
process. These activities can be of varying size and
complexities.
· Different task sets-tasks, milestones, work products
and quality assurance points enable framework
activities to adapt the software requirements and
certain characteristics of software project.
· Finally, umbrella activities such as software quality
assurance (SQA) and Software Configuration
Management (SCM) are conducted. These umbrella
activities depend upon the framework activities

4.1.4 Project
For a successful software project, it is necessary to
understand the mistakes in the project and how to
correct them. John Reel defined ten symptoms to
indicate why the software projects fail -
1. Software developers do not understand the
customer's need.
2. 3. 4. 5. The scope of the project is not defined properly.
Change management is done poorly.
Business needs change very often.
The technological changes are quite often.
6. Users are not co-operative.
7. Unrealistic deadlines are set.
8. Projects do not get sponsored or Sponsorship
gets lost.
9. Lack of skilled people in the project.
10. Project managers do not adopt the best practices
for the projects.

4.2 Metrics for Size Estimation
There are two types of metrics used for size
estimation of the project -
Metrics for size
estimation
LOC based
estimation
Function point
based estimation

4.2.1 LOC based Estimation
· Size oriented measure is derived by considering the
size of software that has been produced.
· The organization builds a simple record of size
measure for the software projects. It is built on past
experiences of organizations. (Refer Fig. 4.2.1)
· It is a direct measure of software
· A simple set of size measure that can be developed
is as given below :
Size = Kilo Lines of Code (KLOC)
Effort = Person/month
Productivity = KLOC/person-month
Quality = Number of faults/KLOC
Cost = $/KLOC
Documentation = Pages of documentation /
KLOC
· The size measure is based on the lines of code
computation. The lines of code is defined as one
line of text in a source file.
· While counting the lines of code the Simplest
Standard is :
Don’t count blank lines.
Don’t count comments.
Count everything else.
· The size oriented measure is not universally
accepted method.
Advantages
1. counted.
Artifact of software development which is easily
2. Many existing methods use LOC as a key input.
3. A large body of literature and data based on
LOC already exists.

Disadvantages
1. This measure is dependent upon the programming language.
2. This method is well designed but shorter program may get suffered.
3. It does not accommodate non procedural languages.
4. In early stage of development it is difficult to estimate LOC.

4.2.2 Function Points
· The oriented model is based on functionality of the delivered application.
· These are generally independent of the programming language used.
· This method is developed by Albrecht in 1979 for IBM. It uses function points.
· Function points are derived using :
1. Countable measures of the software requirements domain
2. Assessments of the software complexity.
How to calculate function point ?
· The data for following information domain characteristics are collected :
1. Number of user inputs - Each user input which provides distinct application data to the software
is counted.
2. Number of user outputs - Each user output that provides application data to the user is counted,
e.g. screens, reports, error messages.
3. Number of user inquiries - An on-line input that results in the generation of some immediate
software response in the form of an output.
4. Number of files - Each logical master file, i.e. a logical grouping of data that may be part of a
database or a separate file.
5. Number of external interfaces - All machine-readable interfaces that are used to transmit
information to another system are counted.
· The organization needs to develop criteria which determine whether a particular entry is simple,
average or complex.
· The weighting factors should be determined by observations or by experiments.
· The count table can be computed with the help of
above given table.
· Now the software complexity can be computed by
answering following questions. These are
complexity adjustment values.
1. Does the system need reliable backup and
recovery ?
2. 3. 4. Are data communications required ?
Are there distributed processing functions ?
Is performance of the system critical ?
5. Will the system run in an existing, heavily
utilized operational environment ?
6. 7. Does the system require on-line data entry ?
Does the on-line data entry require the input
transaction to be built over multiple screens
or operations ?
8. Are the master files updated on-line ?
9. Are the inputs, outputs, files or inquiries
complex ?
10. Is the internal processing complex ?
11. Is the code which is designed being reusable ?
12. Are conversion and installation included in
the design ?
13. Is the system designed for multiple
installations in different organizations ?
14. Is the application designed to facilitate change
and ease of use by the user ?
· Rate each of the above factors according to the
following scale :
· Function Points (FP) = Count total x (0.65 +
(0.01 x Sum(Fi))
· Once the functional point is calculated then we can
compute various measures as follows
Productivity = FP/person-month
Quality = Number of faults/FP
Cost = $/FP
Documentation = Pages of documentation/FP.
Advantages
1. This method is independent of programming
languages.
2. It is based on the data which can be obtained in
early stage of project .
Disadvantages
1) This method is more suitable for business
systems and can be developed for that domain.
2) 3) Many aspects of this method are not validated.
The functional point has no significant meaning.
It is just a numerical value.

4.3 Project Cost Estimation Approach
Project estimation is one of the basic activity in project planning and measurement. There are three
categories of estimation techniques -
Cost estimation approaches
Heuristic
technique
Empirical
technique
Analytical
technique

4.3.2 Overview of Heuristic Technique
· This method makes use of previous project's
estimated cost.
· This method assumes the relationships among the
different project parameters. These parameters are
then correlated using suitable mathematical
expressions.
· Once the basic parameters are known, the other
parameters can be easily determined by substituting
the value of basic parameters in mathematical
expression.
· COCOMO model is an example of Heuristic
technique.
4.3.2 Analytical and Empirical Estimation
Empirical Estimation
· In empirical estimation technique an educated guess
of project parameters is made. Hence empirical
estimation model is based on common sense.
· However as there are many activities involved in
empirical estimation techniques, this technique is
formalized.
· Delphi technique is used for empirical estimation
techniques.
· This method involves more interactions and
communications between those who are
participating. The procedure is as follows.
1. The co-ordinator presents a specification and
estimation form to each expert.
2. Co-ordinator calls a group meeting in which the
experts discuss estimation issues with the
coordinator and each other.
3. 4. Experts fill out forms anonymously.
Co-ordinator prepares and distributes a summary
of the estimates.
5. The co-ordinator then calls a group meeting. In
this meeting the experts mainly discuss the
points where their estimates vary widely.
6. The experts again fill out forms anonymously.
7. Again co-ordinator edits and summarizes the
forms, repeating the steps 5 and 6 until the
coordinator is satisfied with overall prediction
synthesized from experts.
· The key to this technique is in expert co-ordinator.
The co-ordinator must be talented enough to
synthesize the diverse and wide ranging statements.
· This method is successful for technical forecasting.
Analytical Estimation
In analytical estimation technique, the results are
derived by making certain basic assumptions about
the project. Hence analytical estimation technique
have some scientific basis. Halstead's software
science is based on analytical estimation model
4.3.2.1 Halstead's Software Science
Halstead's complexity measurement was developed to
measure a program module’s complexity directly
from source code, with emphasis on computational
complexity.
The Halstead's measures are based on four scalar
numbers derived directly from a program’s source
code :
n 1 is number of distinct operators,
n 2 is number of distinct operands,
N1 is total number of operators,
N2 is total number of operands,
Halstead's uses certain measures such as program
length, program vocabulary, volume, difficulty and
effort for the given algorithm. By this Halstead's is
trying to show that the program length can be
calculated, volume of the algorithm can be estimated.
The above given table shows how actually these
measures can be obtained.
The Halstead's measures are applicable to operational
systems and to development efforts once the code has
been written. Thus using Halstead's measurement
experimental verification can be performed in
software science.
Program length
The length of a program is total usage of operators
and operands in the program.
Length = N N 1 2 +
Program vocabulary
The program vocabulary is the number of unique
operators and operands used in the program.
Vocabulary× n = n n 1 2 +
Program volume
The program volume can be defined as minimum
number of bits needed to encode the program.
V = N log n 2
Length estimation
N = n log n n log n 1 2 1 2 2 2 +
Guideline for calculating operands and operators :
1. All the variables and constants are considered as
operands.
2. Local variables with same name, if occuring in
different functions are counted as unique
operand.
3. Function calls are considered as operators.
4. The looping statements, do ... while, while, for
are operators. The statements if, if ... else are
operators. The switch ... case statements are
considered as operators.
5. The reserve words, return, default, continue,
break, sizeof are all operators.
6. The brackets, commas, semicolons are operators.
7. The unary and binary operators are considered
as operators. The & is considered as operator.
8. In arrays, array name and index are considered
as operands and [ ] is considered as operator.
9. All hash directives can be ignored.
10. Comments are not considered.
11. In Goto statement, goto is considered as operator
and label as operand

4.4 COCOMO
COCOMO is one of the most widely used software
estimation models in the world. This model is
developed in 1981 by Barry Boehm to give an
estimate of the number of man-months it will take to
develop a software product. COCOMO predicts the
efforts and schedule of a software product based on
size of the software. COCOMO stands for
"COnstructive COst MOdel".
COCOMO has three different models that reflect the
complexity -
· Basic model
· Intermediate model
· Detailed model.
Similarly there are three classes of software projects.
1) Organic mode : In this mode, relatively small,
simple software projects with a small team are
handled. Such a team should have good application
experience to less rigid requirements.
2) Semi-detached projects : In this class an
intermediate projects in which teams with mixed
experience level are handled. Such projects may have
mix of rigid and less than rigid requirements.
3) Embedded projects : In this class, projects with
tight hardware, software and operational constraints
are handled.
Let us understand each model in detail.
1) Basic Model : The basic COCOMO model
estimates the software development effort using only
Lines of Code. Various equations in this model are -
bb
E = a (KLOC) b
db
D = C (E) b
P = E/D
Where E is the effort applied in person-months.
D is the development time in chronological months.
KLOC means kilo line of code for the project.
P is total number of persons required to accomplish
the project.
The coefficients a b , bb, cb, db for three modes are as
given below.
(Refer Table. 4.4.1)
Merits of basic COCOMO model
Basic COCOMO model is good for quick, early,
rough order of magnitude estimates of software
project.
Limitations of basic model
1. The accuracy of this model is limited because it
does not consider certain factors for cost
estimation of software. These factors are
hardware constraints, personal quality, and
experience, modern tachniques and tools.
2. The estimates of COCOMO model are within a
factor of 1.3 only 29 % of the time and within the
factor of 2 only 60 % of time
Consider a software project using semi-detached mode with 30,000 lines of code. We will obtain
estimation for this project as follows -
i) Effort estimation
bb
E = a (KLOC) b
i.e. E = 3.0 (30)1.12 where lines of code = 30000 = 30 KLOC
E = 135 person-month
ii) Duration estimation
db
D = C (E) b
= 2.5 ( ).
135 0 35
D = 14 months
iii) Persons estimation
P = E/D
= 135/14
P = 10 persons approximately

4.5 COCOMOII
COCOMO II is applied for modern software
development practices addressed for the projects in
1990’s and 2000’s.
The sub-models of COCOMO II model are –
1. Application composition model
· For estimating the efforts required for the
prototyping projects and the projects in which the
existing software components are used
application-composition model is introduced.
· The estimation in this model is based on the
number of application points. The application points
are similar to the object points.
· This estimation is based on the level of difficulty of
object points.
Boehm has suggested the object point productivity
in the following manner.
 Effort computation in application-composition model
can be done as follows -
PM = (NAP(1–%reuse/100)) / PROD
where
PM means effort required in terms of
person-months.
NAP means number of application
points required.
% reuse indicates the amount of reused
components in the project. These
reusable components can be screens,
reports or the modules used in
previous projects.
PROD is the object point productivity.
These values are given in the above
table.
2. An early design model
· This model is used in the early stage of the project
development. That is after gathering the user
requirements and before the project development
actually starts, this model is used. Hence
approximate cost estimation can be made in this
model.
· The estimation can be made based on the functional
points.
· In early stage of development different ways of
implementing user requirements can be estimated.
· The effort estimation (in terms of person month) in
this model can be made using the following
formula :
Effort = A size M 
where
Boehm has proposed the value of coefficient
A = 2.94.
Size should be in terms of Kilo Source Lines Of
Code i.e. KSLOC. The lines of code can be
computed with the help of function point.
The value of B is varying from 1.1 to 1.24 and
depends upon the project.
M is based on the characteristics such as
1. Product reliability and complexity (RCPX)
2. Reuse required (RUSE)
3. Platform difficulty (PDIF)
4. Personnel capability (PERS)
5. Personnel experience (PREX)
6. Schedule (SCED)
7. Support facilities (FCIL)
· Hence the effort estimation can be given as
PM = 2.94 size M 
M = RUSE PDIF PERS PREX SCED FCIL
3. A reuse model
This model considers the systems that have
significant amount of code which is reused from the
earlier software systems. The estimation made in
reuse model is nothing but the efforts required to
integrated the reused models into the new systems.
· There are two types of reusable codes : black box
code and white box code. The black box code is a
kind of code which is simply integrated with the
new system without modifying it. The white box
code is a kind of code that has to be modified to
some extent before integrating it with the new
system, and then only it can work correctly.
· There is third category of code which is used in
reuse model and it is the code which can be
generated automatically. In this form of reuse the
standard templates are integrated in the generator.
To these generators, the system model is given as
input from which some additional information
about the system is taken and the code can be
generated using the templates.
· The efforts required for automatically the generated
code is
PM = (ASLOC ´ AT/100)/ATPROD
where
AT is percentage of automatically generated code.
ATPROD is the productivity of engineers in
estimating such code
· Sometimes in the reuse model some white box code
is used along with the newly developed code. The
size estimate of newly developed code is equivalent
to the reused code. Following formula is used to
calculate the effort in such a case –
· ESLOC = ASLOC ´ (1–AT/100) X AAM
where
ESLOC means equivalent number of lines of new
source code.
ASLOC means the source lines of code in the
component that has to be adapted
AAM is adaptation Adjustment multiplier. This factor
is used to take into account the efforts required to
reuse the code.
4. Post architecture model
· This model is a detailed model used to compute the
efforts. The basic formula used in this model is
Effort = A Size M B ´ ´
· In this model efforts should be estimated more
accurately. In the above formula A is the amount of
code. This code size estimate is made with the help
of three components –
1. The estimate about new lines of code that is
added in the program.
2. Equivalent number of source lines of code
(ESLOC) used in reuse model.
3. Due to changes in requirements the lines of
code get modified. The estimate of amount of
code being modified.
The exponent term B has three possible values that
are related to the levels of project complexity. The
values of B are continuous rather than discrete. It
depends upon the five scale factors. These scale
factors vary from very low to extra high (i.e. from
5 to 0)
· Add up all these rating and then whatever value
you get, divide it by 100. Then add the resultant
value to 1.01 to get the exponent value.
· This model makes use of 17 cost attributes instead
of seven. These attributes are used to adjust initial
estimate.

4.6 Risk Management 
Definition of risk : The risk denotes the uncertainty
that may occur in the choices due to past actions and
risk is something which causes heavy losses.
Definition of risk management : Risk management
refers to the process of making decisions based on an
evaluation of the factors that threats to the business.
Various activities that are carried out for risk
management are -
1. Risk identification 2. Risk projection
3. Risk refinement
4. Risk mitigation, monitoring and management

4.6.1 Software Risks
There are two characteristics of the risks
The risk may or may not happen. It shows the
uncertainty of the risks.
2. When risks occur, unwanted consequences or
losses will occur.
Different types of risk
1. Project risk
Project risks arise in the software development
process then they basically affect budget,
schedule, staffing, resources, and requirements.
When project risks become severe then the total
cost of project gets increased.
2. Technical risk
These risks affect quality and timeliness of the
project. If technical risks become reality then
potential design implementation, interface,
verification and maintenance problems gets
created. Technical risks occur when problem
becomes harder to solve.
3. Business risk
When feasibility of software product is in suspect
then business risks occur. Business risks can be
further categorized as
i) Market risk - When a quality software product
is built but if there is no customer for this
product then it is called market risk (i.e. no
market for the product).
ii) Strategic risk - When a product is built and if
it is not following the company’s business
policies then such a product brings strategic
risks.
iii) Sales risk - When a product is built but how
to sell is not clear then such a situation brings
sales risk.
iv) Management risk - When senior management
or the responsible staff leaves the organization
then management risk occurs.
v) Budget risk - Losing the overall budget of the
project is called budget risk.
(Refer Fig. 4.6.1)
Another categorization of risk proposed by Charette
is -
Known risks are those risk that are identified after
evaluating the project plan. These risks can also be
identified from other sources such as environment in
which the product gets developed, unrealistic dead
lines, poor requirement specification and software
scope. There are two types of known risks -
predictable and unpredictable risks
Predictable risks are those risks that can be identified
in advance based on past project experience. For
example : Experienced and skilled staff leaving in
between or improper communication with customer
resulting in poor requirement specification.
Unpredictable risks are those risks that can not be
guessed earlier.
For example certain changes in Government policies
may affect the business project.

4.6.2 Risk Identification
Risk identification can be defined as the efforts
taken to specify threats to the project plan. Risks
identification can be done by identifying the known
and predictable risks.
The risk identification is based on two approaches
1. Generic risk identification - It includes potential
threat identification to software project.
2. Product-specific risk identification - It includes
product specific threat identification by
understanding people, technology and working
environment in which the product gets built.
Normally the risk identification is done by the project
manager who follows following steps -
Step 1 : Preparation of risk item check list
The risk items can be identified using following
known and predictable components
i) Product size - The risk items based on overall
size of the software product is identified.
ii) Business impact - Risk items related to the
marketplace or management can be predicted.
iii) Customer characteristics - Risks associated with
customer-developer communication can be
identified.
iv) Process definition - Risks that get raised with the
definition of software process. This category
exposes important risks items because whichever
is the process definition made, is then followed
by the whole team.
v) Development environment - The risks associated
with the technology and tool being used for
developing the product.
vi) Staff size and experience - Once the technology
and tool related risks items are identified it is
essential to identify the risk associated with
sufficient highly experienced and skilled staff
who will do the development.
vii) Technology to be built - complexity of the system
should be understood and related risk items
needs to be identified.
After preparing a risk item checklist a questionnaire
is prepared. These set of questions should be
answered and based on these answers the impact or
seriousness of particular risk item can be judged.
Step 2 : Creating risk components and drivers
list.
The set of risk components and drivers list is
prepared along with their probability of occurrence.
Then their impact on the project can be analysed.
Let us understand which are the risk components and
drivers.

4.6.3 Risk Projection
The risk projection is also called risk estimation (Refer Fig. 4.6.3)
The project planner, technical staff, project manager
performs following steps to perform following steps
for risk projection -
· Establish a scale that indicates the probability of
risk being real.
· Enlist the consequences of the risk.
· Estimate the impact of the risk on the project and
product.
· Maintain the overall accuracy of the risk projection
in order to have clear understanding of the software
that is to be built.
These steps help to prioritize the risks. Once the risks
are prioritized then it becomes easy to allocate the
resources for handling them

4.6.4 Risk Assessment
· Risk assessment is done during the project
planning.
· In this phase the risks are identified, analysed and
then prioritized on the basis of analysis.
· The risk assessment is done throughout the project.
It is most needed at the starting phases of project.
· The goal of the risk assessment is to prioritize the
risks that require an attention.
Risk identification
· Risk identification is the first step in risk
assessment, which identifies all the different risks
for a particular project.
· Various methods that can be used to identify the
risks are -
Preparing checklists for identifying the risks,
Conducting surveys and meetings,
Having brainstorming sessions,
Reviewing of plans, processes, and work
products.
· Based on the surveys, Bohem has produced a list of
top 10 risks items. This list helps in identifying the
risks in the project
· Apart from preparing a checklist, other methods of
risk identification are decision driver analysis,
assumption analysis and decomposition.
· In decision driver analysis technique, there is
questioning and analyzing of all the major decisions
taken for the project. If the decisions are driven by
some non technical factors such as politics or
marketing then the probability of occurrence of risk
is very high.
· For identifying the risks assumptions about the
project are compared with the pat experiences of
the project.
· In decomposition technique the large project is
broken down into small parts and analysis is made
in order to identify the risks.
· The next task after risk identification is risk analysis
and prioritization.
Risk Analysis
· Risk analysis is the process in which probability of
occurrence of risk and the corresponding losses are
estimated.
· If cost models are used for cost and schedule
estimation, then the same models can be used to
assess the cost and schedule risk. For example
COCOMO model can be used for to analyse the
cost and schedule risks.
· Risk analysis can be done by estimating the
worst-case value of size and all the cost drivers.
From these values the project cost can be estimated.
This will give us the worst-case analysis. Then
using the worst-case effort estimate, the
worst-case schedule can easily be obtained.
· Another approach of risk analysis is making
analysis of various things like -
Outcome of various decisions(Decision analysis)
Risks on various factors such as reliability and
usability(quality factor analysis)
Performance constraints(performance analysis).
Risk Prioritization
· After risk analysis the impact of each risk on the
project can be analysed. Based on this impact risks
can be prioritised.
· Risk exposure computing is done for prioritising
the risks. Risk exposure is also called as risk
impact.
· The risk exposure can be calculated by following
formula,
Risk Exposure = Probability of occurrence of risk
*Loss due to unsatisfactory outcome
· Thus risk exposure for each risk from risk table is
calculated. The total risk exposure of all risks helps
in determining the final cost of the project.
4.6.5 Risk Containment
· Risk containment means reduction of risk.
· The project manager and team will be able to
identify strategies to minimize or eliminate the risk
factors.
· For example - If a project is facing high risk due to
lack of experience in development platform, then
the recruiter or hiring expert contractor can control
this risk by hiring the skilled and experienced
employee for the desired project.
· Lot of high risk factors can be eliminated or
reduced during the risk assessment.
4.6.6 RMMM Strategy
RMMM stands for risk mitigation, monitoring and
management. There are three issues in strategy for
handling the risk is
1. Risk avoidance 2. Risk monitoring
3. Risk management.
Risk mitigation
Risk mitigation means preventing the risks to
occur(risk avoidance). Following are the steps to be
taken for mitigating the risks.
1. Communicate with the concerned staff to find of
probable risk.
2. Find out and eliminate all those causes that can
create risk before the project starts.
3. Develop a policy in an organization which will
help to continue the project even though some
staff leaves the organization.
4. Everybody in the project team should be
acquainted with the current development activity.
5. Maintain the corresponding documents in timely
manner. This documentation should be strictly as
per the standards set by the organization.
6. Conduct timely reviews in order to speed up the
work.
7. For conducting every critical activity during
software development, provide the additional
staff if required.
Risk monitoring
In risk monitoring process following things must be
monitored by the project manager,
1. The approach or the behaviour of the team
members as pressure of project varies.
2. The degree in which the team performs with the
spirit of “team-work”.
3. The type of co-operation among the team
members.
4. The types of problems that are occurring.
5. Availability of jobs within and outside the
organization.
The project manager should monitor certain
mitigation steps. For example.
If the current development activity is monitored
continuously then everybody in the team will get
acquainted with current development activity.
The objective of risk monitoring is
1. To check whether the predicted risks really occur
or not.
2. To ensure the steps defined to avoid the risk are
applied properly or not.
3. To gather the information which can be useful
for analyzing the risk.
Risk management
Project manager performs this task when risk
becomes a reality. If project manager is successful in
applying the project mitigation effectively then it
becomes very much easy to manage the risks.
For example, consider a scenario that many people
are leaving the organization then if sufficient
additional staff is available, if current development
activity is known to everybody in the team, if latest
and systematic documentation is available then any
‘new comer’ can easily understand current
development activity. This will ultimately help in
continuing the work without any interval


Unit 5: Software Quality Assurance and Security

5.1 Project Scheduling
Definition : Project scheduling is an activity the
estimated efforts are distributed across the planned
project duration by allocating effort to specific
software engineering tasks.
In project the scheduling can be done using two
simple activities -
1. Determining overall schedule by using different
important milestones.
Developing detailed schedule for different tasks

5.1.1 Basic Principle 
Following are basic principles used in project
scheduling -
(1) Compartmentalization : The project is partitioned
or compartmentalized into number of activities,
actions and tasks.
(2) Interdependency : The interdependency of each
compartmentalized activity, task and action must be
determined. Some tasks execute in sequence and
some might execute in parallel.
(3) Time Allocation : For each scheduled task, some
number of work units must be allocated. The start
date and end date of each allocated task must be
specified.
(4) Effort Validation : The number of people
allocated for the scheduled tasks must be validated
by the project manager.
(5) Defined Responsibilities : Every task that is
scheduled should be assigned to specific team
member.
(6) Defined Outcomes : Every scheduled task must
have definite outcome.
(7) Defined Milestones : Every task or group of tasks
should be associated with a project milestone

5.1.2 Work Breakdown Structure
· Work breakdown Structure(WBS) is a process of
dividing the complex projects to simpler and
manageable tasks.
· In WBS, the large tasks are broken down into
manageable chunks of work. These chunks can be
easily examined and analysed.
· The project manager is responsible for creation of
WBS.
Construction of Work Breakdown Structure
(1) The first step in creation of work breakdown
structure is to identify the main deliverable of
the project.
(2) Then the high level tasks are identified and they
are broken down into smaller chunks of work.
(3) In the process of breaking down the tasks, one
can break them down into different levels of
detail. One can detail a high-level task into ten
sub-tasks while another can detail the same
high-level task into 20 sub-tasks. Thus there is no
standard rule for breaking down of task into
chunks. In general there is a simple rule is that -
The smallest tasks of WBS is should not be
smaller than two weeks worth of work.
Another rule is - no task should be smaller than 8
hours of work and should not be larger than 80
hours of work.
(4) There are many forms of displaying the work
breakdown structure - it can be in tree like form,
table or list form. For example - Example of WBS : The work breakdown structure for a simple product development is as shown
below -(Refer Fig. 5.1.1 and Fig. 5.1.2)

5.1.3 Activity Network and Critical Path Method
Bar charts and activity networks are graphical representation of project schedule. The beginning and
end of the activity, responsible staff for corresponding activity is shown by bar chart.
Activity network show dependencies between different activities. There are some automating project
management tools using which bar chart and activity network can be generated. These tools require
database of project information as an input.

5.1.4 Scheduling Techniques
· There are two commonly used scheduling
techniques - PERT and CPM.
· The PERT stands for Project management and
Review Technique. This technique is used for the
projects where time needed to complete different
activities are not known.
· The CPM stands for Critical Path Method. This
technique is used in conjunction with PERT and is
used for managing the well defined activities of the
project.
· The PERT and CPM technique is used for -
Prediction of deliverables.
Planning resource requirements
Controlling resource allocation
Internal and external program review
Performance evaluation
· Various framework activities in PERT/CPM are -
Define the project. The project should have
single start activity and single finish activity.
Develop relationships among the activities.
Draw the network diagram for connecting all
the activities
Assign time and cost to each activity.
Compute critical path.
Use network to help plan, schedule, monitor
and control the project.
· Example -
· The formula used in PERT to calculate number of
working days is based on three point estimate.
· The three point estimates are optimistic, most likely
and pessimistic estimates.
· Formula is
PERT weighted average
Optimistic time+ 4 ´
Most likely time
+ Pessimistic time
=
6
· Example : Given that
Optimistic time = 6 days
Most likely time = 9 days
Pessimistic time = 12 days
then
PERT weighted average = 6 4 9 12
+ ´ + ( ) = 9
6
· Thus it would be 9 days using PERT.
· The main advantage of PERT is that it attempts to
address the risk associated with duration estimates.

5.2 Project Tracking 
· Project schedule is the most important factor for
software project manager. It is the duty of project
manager to decide the project schedule and track
the schedule.
· Tracking the schedule means determine the tasks
and milestones in the project as it proceeds.
· Following are the various activities conducted
during tracking of the project schedule -
1. Conduct periodic meetings. In this meeting
various problems related to the project get
discussed. The progress of the project is reported
to the project manager
2. Evaluate results of all the project reviews.
3. Compare 'actual start date' and 'scheduled start
date' of each of the project task.
4. Determine if the milestones of the project is
achieved on scheduled date.
5. Meet informally the software practioners. This
will help the project manager to solve many
problems. This meeting will also be helpful for
assessing the project progress.
6. Assess the progress of the project quantitatively.
· Thus for tracking the schedule of the project the
project manager should be an experienced person.
In fact project manager is the only responsible
person who is controlling the software project.
· When some problems occur in the project then
addition resources may be demanded, skilled and
experienced staff may be employed or project
schedule can be redefined.
5.2.1 Time Line Chart (Gantt Chart)
· In software project scheduling the timeline chart is
created. The purpose of timeline chart is to
emphasize the scope of individual task. Hence set of
tasks are given as input to the time line chart.
· The time line chart is also called as Gant chart.
· The time line chart can be developed for entire
project or it can be developed for individual
functions.
· In time line chart
1) All the tasks are listed at the leftmost column.
2) The horizontal bars indicate the time required by
the corresponding task.
3) When multiple horizontal bars occur at the same
time on the calendar, then that means
concurrency can be applied for performing the
tasks.
4) The diamonds indicate the milestones.
· In most of the projects, after generation of time line
chart the project tables are prepared. In project
tables all the tasks are listed along with actual start
and end dates and related information
(Refer Fig. 5.2.1)

5.2.2 Earned Value Analysis
· The Earned Value Analysis (EVA) takes into consideration the project context for planned and actual
expenditure.
· This analysis is made to find out project scope, schedule and resource characteristics.
· The EVA acts as a measure for software project progress.
· Various measures are determined during EVA. These measures are -
1) Planned Value (PV) : It denotes the planned cost of the work. The planned value is developed by
first determining all of the work, that must be accomplished for successful project result.
2) Actual Cost (AC) : It represents the actual amount that the business has to expend on the project.
AC = Efforts expended on work task that have been completed by time t
å.
3) Earned Value (EV) : It is project manager’s estimate of the amount of originally budgeted work
completed.
4) Budget At Completion (BAC) : It represents total budget for the project.
5) Schedule Variance (SV) : It indicates the status of the schedule. It represents whether work is
ahead or behind the plan. If SV is negative the project is behind schedule, if it is positive then
project is ahead of schedule. If SV is equal to zero, then project is on schedule.
6) Cost Variance (CV) : It is the difference between
earned value and actual cost.
If CV = 0 then project is on budget.
If CV < 0 then project is over budget
If CV > 0 then project is under budget
7) Schedule Performance Index (SPI) : It is a
measure of schedule efficiency on a project. If
SPI = 1.0, project is on schedule.
If SPI is greater than 1 then project is ahead of
the schedule.
IF SPI is less than 1 then project is getting
delayed and it is behind the schedule.
8) Cost Performance Index (CPI) : It is a measure
of cost efficiency on a project. The value 1.0
represents that project is within the given budget.
If CPI < 1.0 then that means project is over
budgeted.
If CPI > 1.0 then that means project is under
budgeted and we require most cost to
accomplish the project.
Formula used during (EVA) :
PV = Planned Completion (%)
* Budget At Completion (BAC)
EV = Actual Completion (%) BAC *
SV = EV – PV
CV = EV – AC
SPI = EV/PV
CPI = EV/AC
Ex. 5.2.1 Mr. Koushan is the project manager on a
project to build a new cricket stadium in Mumbai, India.
After six months of work, the project is 27 % complete. At
the start of the project, Koushan estimated that it would
cost $ 50,000.000, What is the Earned value ?
Sol. : The formula for Earned value is -
Earned value = % of work × Budget
= 27 % × 50000
=
27
100 / / ´ \ The earned value is $ 13,500

5.3 Software Quality Management Vs.
Software Quality Assurance
· Definition of Quality : The International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines
quality as the totality of characteristics of an entity
that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied
needs.
· The project quality management is a process which
ensures that the project will satisfy the needs for
which it was undertaken.
· The main principle of project quality management is
to ensure the project will meet or exceed
stakeholder's needs and expectations.
· The project team must develop a good relationship
with key stakeholders.
· The project quality management is performed using
following three key processes.
1. Planning Quality Management
2. Performing Quality Assurance
3. Controlling Quality

5.4 Phases of Software Quality Assurance
· Definition of quality assurance : It is planned and
systematic pattern of activities necessary to provide
a high degree of confidence in the quality of a
product. It provides quality assessment of the
quality control activities and determines the validity
of the data or procedures for determining quality.
· The quality assurance consists of set of reporting
and auditing functions.
· These functions are useful for assessing and
controlling the effectiveness and completeness of
quality control activities.
· The goal of quality assurance is to ensure the
management of data which is important for product
quality.
Statistical Quality Assurance
· Statistical software quality assurance is a simple
concept which represents that changes in the
software can be made in order to improve those
elements of the process that introduce error.
· Statistical software quality assurance can be
performed with the help of following steps -
1. Collect the information about software defects.
Categorize them.
2. Make an attempt to trace each defect to its root
cause.
3. Isolate the vital few causes of the major source
of all errors by using the 80-20 principle(known
as Pareto principle). This principle is “80 % of
the defects can be traced to 20 % of all possible
causes”.
4. Then move to correct the problems that have
caused the defects (Refer Fig. 5.4.1)
Software Quality Assurance Activities
Let us list out the SQA activities conducted by SQA
group.
1. Create a SQA plan.
A SQA plan is developed while planning the project.
Quality assurance activities are conducted that are
indicated in this plan. This plan basically
· Identifies evaluations to be performed.
· Audits and reviews to be performed, standards that
should be adopted for the project.
· Procedures for error reporting and tracking.
· It also specifies documents to be produced by SQA
group.
· Amount of feedback provided to the software
project team.
2. Participates in description of software process.
The process selected by the software team is
reviewed by the SQA group. This review is for
· Process description to ensure that it follows the
organizational policy.(Refer Fig. 5.4.2)
· Internal software standards.
· Some standards that are adopted by the
organization.
3. Reviews software engineering activities.
The SQA group identifies and documents the
processes. The group also verifies the correctness of
software process.
4. Authenticate designated software work
products.
The SQA group performs following tasks -
· Reviews selected work product
· Identifies the process
· Documents them
· Tracks deviations
· Verifies the correctness made in the processes
· Regular reporting of results of its work to the
project manager.
5. Ensure the deviations in software work.
Document work products
The deviations in software work are identified from
project plan. These processes are identified and
handled according to documented procedure.
6. Identify any noncompliance and reports to
senior management.
Non compliance items are identified and pursued
until they get resolved. The periodic reporting about
it is done to project manager

5.5 Software Quality Control 
· Quality control is a process in which activities are
conducted in order to maintain the quality of
product. These activities are series of inspections,
reviews and tests used throughout the software
process. These activities ensure whether each work
product is satisfying the requirements imposed on
it.
· While applying the quality control there should be a
feedback loop to the process which generates the
work product. With the help of such feedback we
can tune the process if it does not satisfy the
requirements. The feedback loop helps in
minimizing the defects in the software product.
· The quality control activities can be fully automated
or it can be completely manual or it can be a
combination of automated tools and manual
procedures.

5.6 Quality Evaluation Standards 
5.6.1 Six Sigma
Six sigma is widely used statistical software quality
assurance strategy. It is a business driven approach to
process improvement, reduced costs and increased
profit. The word “six sigma” is derived from six
standard deviations - 3.4 defects per million
occurrences. Six Sigma originated at Motorola in the
early 1980s.
There are three core steps in six sigma method -
Define - The customer requirements, project goals
and deliverables are defined by communicating the
customers.
Measure - The existing process and its output is
measured in order to determine current quality
performance.
(Refer Fig. 5.6.1)
Analyze - In this phase defect metrics are analyzed in
order to determine the few causes.
If an improvement is needed to an existing software
then there are additional two methods in six sigma -
Improve - By eliminating the root causes of defects
the process can be improved.
Control - The process can be controlled in such a
way that the causes of defects can not be
reintroduced.
These steps can sometimes be referred as DMAIC.
For a newly developing software, some organizations
are suggesting following two alternating steps -
Design - In this step avoid root causes of defects and
meet the customer requirements.
Verify - To verify the process, avoid defects and
meet customer requirements.
These steps can sometimes be referred as DMADV

5.6.2 SO for Software
· In order to bring quality in the product and service,
many organizations are adopting the quality
assurance system.
· The quality assurance systems are the organizational
structures that are used to bring quality in
responsibilities, procedures, processes and resources.
· ISO 9000 is a family of quality assurance system. It
can be applied to all types of organizations. It
doesn’t matter what size they are or what they do.
It can help both product and service oriented
organizations to achieve standards of quality.
· ISO 9000 is maintained by ISO, the International
Organization for Standardization and is
administered by accreditation and certification
bodies.
· In ISO 9000, company’s quality system and
operations are scrutinized by third-party auditors
for a complaince to the standard and effective
operation. This process is called registration to ISO
9000.
· On successful registration, the company gets a
certification from accreditation bodies of ISO. Such a
company is then called “ISO certified company”.
· ISO 9001:2000 is a quality assurance standard which
is applied to software engineering systems.
· It focuses on process flows, customer satisfaction,
and the continual improvement of quality
management systems.
· ISO 9001:2000 specifies requirements for a quality
system that can be applied to any size or type of
organization.
· The guideline steps for ISO 9001:2000 are
Establish quality management system - Identify
and manage the processes in the quality
management system.
Document the quality management system
Support the quality
Satisfy the customers
Establish quality policy
Conduct quality planning
Control quality systems
Perform management reviews
Provide quality resources
Provide quality personnel
Provide quality infrastructure
Provide quality environment
Control realization planning
Control customer processes
Control product development
Control purchasing functions
Control operational activities
Control monitoring devices
Control non confirming products
Analyze quality information
Make quality improvement
· The ISO 9000 helps in creating organisational
quality manuals. These quality manuals identify the
organisational quality processes.
· Using these quality manuals, the project quality
plan can be prepared for every individual project.
Thus project quality management can be done.
This is illustrated by following Fig. 5.6.2.

5.6.3 CMMI
· The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has
developed a comprehensive process meta-model
emphasizing process maturity. It is predicated on a
set of system and software capabilities that should
be present when organizations reach different levels
of process capability and maturity.
· The Capability Maturity Model (CMM) is used in
assessing how well an organization’s processes
allow to complete and manage new software
projects.
· Various process maturity levels are
Level 1 : Initial - Few processes are defined and
individual efforts are taken.
Level 2 : Repeatable - To track cost schedule and
functionality basic project management
processes are established. Depending on earlier
successes of projects with similar applications
necessary process discipline can be repeated.
Level 3 : Defined - The process is standardized,
documented and followed. All the projects use
documented and approved version of software
process which is useful in developing and
supporting software.
Level 4 : Managed - Both the software process and
product are quantitatively understood and
controlled using detailed measures.
Level 5 : Optimizing - Establish mechanisms to
plan and implement change. Innovative ideas
and technologies can be tested.
Thus CMM is used for improving the software
project
(Refer Fig. 5.6.3)

5.7 Software Security
Software security is a concept which is implemented
to protect software against malicious attack and other
hacker risks so that the software continues to function
correctly under such potential risks.
By providing software security - the integrity,
authentication and availability is provided to the
software system.
Basic Principles of Software Security
1. Protection from disclosure
2. Protection from alteration
3. Protection from destruction
4. Who is making the request
5. What rights and privileges does the requester
have
6. Ability to build historical evidence
7. Management of configuration, sessions and
errors/exceptions

5.8 Introduction to DEVOPs
Definition : Devops is a practice in which
development and operation engineers participate
together in entire lifecycle activities of system
development from design, implementation to product
support.
· The term Devops is derived from "Software
DEVelopment " and "information technology
OPerationS".
· Devops promotes a set of processes and methods
from the three department Development, IT
operations and Quality assurance that communicate
and collaborate together for development of
software system.
(Refer Fig. 5.8.1)
Need for DEVOPs
· Devops enhances the organization's performance,
improves the productivity and efficiency of
development and operations teams.
· Bringing the two teams together centralizes the
responsibility on the entire team and not specific
individuals working.
· Devops is more than just a tool or a process change.
It inherently requires an organizational culture shift.
· This cultural change is especially difficult, because
of the conflicting nature of departmental roles :
1. Operations - seeks organizational stability;
2. Developers - seek change;
3. Testers - seek risk reduction.
· Adoption of Devops is driven by various factors.
These factors are -
1. Demand for an increased rate of production
releases - from application and business unit
stakeholders.
2. Increased usage of data center automation and
configuration management tools.
3. Use of agile and other development processes
and methods.
4. Increased focus on test automation and
continuous integration methods.
5. Wide availability of virtualized and cloud
infrastructure.
Goals
The Goals of Devops are as follows -
1. To make simple processes increasing
programmable and dynamic
2. Fast delivery of product.
3. Lower failure rate of new releases.
4. Shortened lead time between fixes.
5. 6. 8. Faster mean time to recovery.
Increases net profit of organization.
7. To standardize development environment.
To reduce work in progress.
9. To reduce operating expenses.
10. To set up automated environment.
Benefits
Various benefits of Devops are -
· Technical Benefits
1. Continuous software delivery is possible
2. There is less complexity to manage the
project.
· The problems in the project gets resolved faster.
· Cultural benefits
1. The productivity of teams get increased.
2. There is higher employee engagement.
3. There arise greater professional development
opportunities.
· Business benefits
1. The faster delivery of the product is possible.
2. The operating environment becomes stable.
3. The communication and collaboration gets
improved among the teams members and
customer.
4. More time is available for innovation rather
than fixing and maintaining.

5.9 Secure Software Engineering
· Secure Software engineering is concerned with
developing and maintaining software systems that
behave reliably and efficiently by satisfying all the
requirements of its customers.
· The secure software -
(1) prevents loss of data.
(2) prevents premature leaks of data.
(3) Prevents downtime of resources
Secure Software Engineering Life Cylce
· A Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) is a
framework that defines the process used by
organizations to build an application. Over the
years, multiple standard SDLC models have been
proposed (Waterfall, Iterative, Agile, etc.) and used
in various ways to fit individual circumstances.
· In general, SDLCs include the following phases:
1. Planning and requirements.
2. Architecture and design.
3. Test planning.
4. Coding.
5. Testing and results.
6. Release and maintenance.
· In the past, it was common practice to perform
security-related activities only as part of testing.
This technique usually resulted in a high number of
issues discovered too late.
· It is better to integrate security concerning activities
across the SDLC to help discover and reduce
vulnerabilities early, effectively building security in.
· A Secure SDLC process ensures that security
assurance activities such as penetration testing, code
review, and architecture analysis are an integral
part of the development effort.
· The primary advantages of secure software
development Life cycle is -
(1) More secure software as security is a
continuous concern.
(2) Awareness of security considerations by
stakeholders.
(3) Early detection of flaws in the system.
(4) Cost reduction as a result of early detection
and resolution of issues.
(5) Overall reduction of business risks for the
organization
 











